The Internet may be overflowing with new technology but crime in cyberspace is still of the old-fashioned variety.
That's the conclusion of the National Consumers League, which reported Tuesday that false securities offers were the most popular type of Internet con reported since its Internet Fraud Watch opened in February.
The finding was based on reports to the Internet Fraud Watch site (www.fraud.org) operated by the league. Since its inception two years ago, the site has received over 21,000 reports of suspected scams or fraudulent activities.  "Pyramid schemes work because they take advantage of people's greed. People invest large sums, hoping to become millionaires," said Susan Grant, the league's director of public policy. "Unfortunately, most people lose their entire investments."
The site, which collects reports directly from consumers, has been widely praised by law enforcement agencies.
"Consumers who suspect a scam on the Internet have critical information," said Jodie Bernstein, director of the Federal Trade Commission's Bureau of Consumer Protection. Internet Fraud Watch "has been a major help to the FTC in identifying particular scams in their infancy."
"The Internet is home to true 'snake oil' salesmen," Bernstein said. "Consumers have to be careful."
Fraud reports from the league's site, which has been visited over 370,000 times, are forwarded to local, state and federal authorities.
In second place on the scam list came "boiler-room" operations, companies that run large telemarketing campaigns using high-pressure sales tactics to spread worthless stocks.
Pyramid schemes and Internet services scams found on the web are the same as those found off-line, Bernstein said. "But it's much harder to regulate the Internet," she added.  The success of the Internet in making it easier for crooks to collect money is highlighted by one of the league's latest complaints: A web site allowed credit card information to be entered while using a secure transmission method for a total of $3,600. The site disappeared after the money was sent.
Other top scams involve business opportunities. Con artists may offer shares in a business or franchise using unreasonable predictions or misrepresentations. One popular scheme promised to let consumers get rich while working at home.
The League also announced Tuesday that NationsBank had donated $100,000 to become a sponsor of the Fraud Watch site.