The U.S. Postal Service announced Wednesday a plan to boost online commerce by enhancing the security and reliability of electronic mail traveling on the Internet.
Under the plan, businesses and consumers can verify that e-mail has not been tampered with and use services now available for ordinary mail like sending a certified letter.
"The leap from trading messages to buying and selling goods has been blocked by the fear of security threats," Robert Reisner, vice president of stategic planning, said.
Using a system called Secure Electronic Delivery, mail senders can transmit an encrypted message attached to a password-protected letter. The recipient then must type in the password in order to decrypt the message. A code issued by the Post Office will also ensure that the document hasn't been altered during delivery.
Cylink Corp is developing a system for the Post Office to use to verify the identity of e-mail senders. The system will enable people to register a digital "signature" with the Post Office that can be compared against electronic mail they send.
If any tampering is discovered, the Postal Service would investigate, just like it investigates tampering with regular mail, Reisner said.
The Post Office is also using the Internet to enhance non-electronic mail delivery.
For example, the Post Office is working with developers to write programs in the Java programming language to access rate and delivery information over the Internet.
Instead of manually calculating postage rates for bulk mailings, possibly using outdated forms, a bulk mailer will be able to add up the charges using a software application written with Java and posted on the Internet.
Also, it plans to expand a service which allows customers to send packages online and have them tracked.
The new system will enable a shipper to access postage options and pricing instantaneously and then order labels printed up with bar codes for tracking the packages. In the future the Post Office is planning to allow customers to buy postage on demand either over the Internet or through automated terminals.
The proposal is in its earliest phases and the Post Office is still researching what technologies it needs to develop, Reisner said. High technology and policy issues both must be addressed before electronic commerce grows, he said.
"Remember the pilots who returned from World War I and then risked their lives in an even more dangerous duty," Resiner said refering to early airmail delivery efforts.
"To keep these daring pilots alive, the Postal Service had to create parts of what we know as the weather service today. Navigation aids had to be developed. We are watching many of these same dynamics today. Earlier experience tells us that this is a public and private job."
--202-898-8312