The Internet continued to grow in leaps and bounds this year while online services found it much harder to add new customers, a new survey says.
Harris Interactive Inc.'s latest survey of 1,000 Americans found that while about 53% of Americans use computers, 52% of that total can now access the Internet. In January, only 42% of computer users could be classified as Internet users.
"Although the number of people who use computers has fluctuated around just over half of the adult population, the number of adult Americans using computers for cyber-activities is growing," said Humphrey Taylor, chairman of the polling organisation.
Internet use among adults had more than tripled since 1994, when the survey firm first started tracking it. The survey found that the number of people using computers grew to 54 percent from 53 percent at the beginning of the year. and that the number of people using computers and going online both in the home and in the workplace has continued to increase even as more people turn to the Internet to get information and exchange emails.
The survey showed that 36 percent of adults had used computers in some form over a one-year period, up from 33 percent in January, Harris said. Of that group, 18 percent had used a computer by accessing the Internet, also up from 15 percent in January.
Businesses, which are looking to the Internet as a potential source of new revenue, are intensely interested in figures on its usage. Differing surveys have come up with widely varying numbers.
The Harris poll found that, although more people are getting wired, they are on average spending less time in cyberspace.
The average amount of time that adults were on their computers dropped from nearly 8.9 hours to 8.4 hours per week. The survey also found that twice as many people were using computers at work as each month earlier, showing that a growing number of businesses are becoming hooked up. The survey said about 58 percent of all adults used a computer at work or in a business in July, compared with 46 percent in June and 36 percent at the beginning of the year.
A June survey by Dun and Bradstreet estimated the number of home Internet users at 28 million. A recently released survey by the Media Metrix research firm said U.S. Internet users reached a total of 54 million in October.  The Harris survey showed women continuing to close the gender gap in the realm of online usage, with 38 percent of female respondents saying they had gone on the Internet, up from 27 percent at the beginning of the year. Male users rose to 52 percent from 39 percent since January.
Three quarters of those earning $50,000 or more said they used a computer while only 31 percent of those making less than $20,000 did. Among Internet users, 77 percent had some college education or higher, compared to only 44 percent for non-users.
The poll's results were based on a telephone survey of 1,032 adults at the end of September and have a margin of error of plus or minus 3 percentage points, according to Harris.