The growing business of doing business on the Internet poses a major challenge to tax collectors, but no special taxes should be imposed in cyberspace, the government said in report released Thursday.
"Treasury believes that these new technologies should not be used to justify new taxes," the Treasury Department draft report said. "Accordingly, Treasury is not considering any type of value added tax, 'bit tax,' or other new excise tax on electronic commerce."
Instead, the current system should evolve to tax income from all sources in a consistent manner, the department said.
The 37-page report, it's from the US Treasury Department, is a much-awaited analysis of how the government might respond to the exploding business of Internet and other electronic commerce.
Businesses are already struggling with tax proposals from state and local governments, according to Kent Johnson, head of sales and transaction tax practice at KPMG Peat Marwick.
"State governments don't feel the same way as the federal government, but this report may be a good starting point for discussing all the issues," Johnson said.
The report is part of a larger federal effort to address the complexities posed by e-commerce, such as taxation, privacy and security issues. The report said the government will strive to keep Internet taxes to a minimum and not interfere with the growth of e-commerce. The report said that taxing Internet transactions should not be any different from taxing sales or services bought and sold in the "real world."
But the current laws and regulations make it "almost impossible" to apply the tax system to online commerce, according to congressional sources and many corporate tax directors.
The Treasury Department report found that online enterprises are already subject to the same mix of taxes and exemptions as all other forms of commerce, such as property taxes, corporate income taxes, excise taxes, income taxes, estate taxes and sales taxes. For example, the department found that buying online is exempted from most telephone taxes, but toll-free telephone calls used to place orders are still subject to the 3 percent federal excise tax.
The department also said it was worried that tax evaders could use the anonymity provided by the Internet as a mask to avoid reporting income or to transfer money to offshore bank accounts.
Further, the ever-mutating software, which makes up many online businesses, may be beyond the government's enforcement capabilities.  "It is essential that taxpayers comply with the regulations in a timely manner in order for any revenue to be collected," the report said.  The Treasury also believes that the taxation of the Internet should follow regulations designed to apply to all forms of business.  "The taxation of electronic business transactions should recognize that today's electronic business models may drastically reduce the amount of labor and other resources necessary to produce a given product," Robert Davidson, a Treasury official said in a memo to the department.  But while recognizing the special needs of electronic businesses, the Treasury should also be careful not to create loopholes, the report said.  The report proposed that Congress pass uniform laws covering the taxation of income from all sources, and that the department take steps to ensure that current forms of taxation, such as for capital gains and other income not subject to withholding, continue to apply to electronic commerce.  The report acknowledged that changing old laws might prove difficult, and proposed that the department sponsor conferences to discuss taxation issues. The report also proposed that the department create a task force to monitor the issue.
"The system that state governments have been using to collect sales taxes is archaic. It needs to be overhauled," Johnson said.  Simplifying the system used by the states to charge sales tax is one aspect that the department is looking into, officials said.  The Treasury Department has not set a date for a final report on how taxes should be dealt with in cyberspace.
The report on taxation is likely to be followed by reports on other aspects of online commerce that the department is studying, including consumer protection, electronic money, bank regulation and law enforcement, officials said.