A U.S. District Court judge Wednesday barred new federal regulations that allow credit unions to expand their membership beyond workers at one company, saying this would exceed the legal limits of the institutions.
The injunction rests a long-running dispute between the credit union industry and banks, both of which offer similar services. Banks say the move would provide credit unions with an unfair competitive advantage, by allowing them to expand far beyond their originally envisioned membership bases.
The National Credit Union Administration had adopted the new rules in November, saying it was responding to an emergency situation caused by the court rulings.
Judge Royce Lamberth ordered the Credit Union National Association and the National Credit Union Administration to immediately rescind the new rules.
Earlier court rulings limited members of a credit union to a single company or organization. The court actions struck down a 1982 NCUA decision allowing credit unions to draw members from multiple companies.
"The NCUA has tried to bypass the law through a gimmick and the court is not going to tolerate it," said Johnson, a lawyer for the American Bankers Association.
"The new regulations will allow credit unions to join together people in unrelated occupations who work in the same geographic area from having a single common bond," wrote Jackson in his ruling. "This of course represents a significant departure from the statutory limits on credit unions created by Congress."
"The agency went out of its way to avoid prior court rulings, without any pretense that they are protecting the consumer or the credit union industry," he said.
But Jackson's ruling was strongly worded and he accused the NCUA of doing an end run around the court rulings.
"The court was appalled by the NCUA's actions, as y ou might have noticed from the reading of the decision," said Paul Hancock, a lawyer for the American Bankers Association.
Jackson also questioned the agency's reasoning for adopting the new regulations in an apparent attempt to get around the court's injunctions. "Was it an attempt to throw a monkey wrench in the works of the court?" he asked.
"It was the NCUA's determination that to survive, credit unions had to expand their membership," Goulian said.
In 1990, the ABA and five North Carolina banks filed suit againt AT&amp;T Family Federal Credit Union, which had grown to encompass members from more than 150 different occupational groups.
The ABA argued that federal law allowing non-profit credit unions to exist only if they serve members with common bonds, had been broken by AT&amp;T Family Federal Credit Union. In a September ruling, Jackson agreed, saying the credit union had exceeded the spirit and the letter of the law.
After that ruling, Jackson issued two injunctions ordering the NCUA to block any effort to expand the membership base of existing credit unions.
The credit union industry has said the injunctions will result in millions of people being expelled from credit unions, with some unable to afford similiar but more expensive services from banks.
The NCUA responded last month by allowing credit unions to draw members from the same trade, industry or profession even if they worked for different companies. This definition bypassed the earlier court rulings because it did not require multiple credit union members to share one employer.
In his ruling Wednesday, Jackson said the new rules would not withstand judicial scrutiny and thus he had to apply the injunctions. He noted that the agency had made the new regulations retroactive, a move he said was clearly designed to help credit unions avoid the court rulings.
Tracy Sefl, a spokeswoman for the Credit Union National Association, the industry's main trade association, said the judge's decision would have a negative impact on consumers.
"We're going to decide [about an appeal] in the next few days," Furlow said.
Paul Schosberg, president of the trade association America's Community Bankers, praised Jackson's ruling. "The NCUA has clearly stretched the law's common bond requirement beyond all recognition," he said.