The Internet could provide a huge boost to the U.S. economy if the federal government pursues "free market" policies in cyberspace, a group of President Clinton's top advisers says in a draft report obtained by Reuters.
The report recommends that the U.S. lead global efforts to limit government regulation of the Internet, including avoiding new taxes on Internet-based businesses.  The draft report is expected to be released soon by the Clinton Administration's top Internet adviser, Ira Magaziner. The draft was circulated earlier this summer to several government agencies, including the Commerce Department.  Task force organizers are now revising the document on the basis of comments from the invited agencies, Magaziner said.
"A strong private sector economy requires a vibrant and electronic infrastructure and vigorous entrepreneurial spirit," the draft report, dated June 20, said. "Government's role should be to facilitate the development of this infrastructure, rather than impede it with needless regulation."
"One of the things we're trying to do with this paper is as much say what government should not do as say what they should do," Magaziner said. "A lot of what industry is concerned about is that governments are already beginning to take actions around the world that would inhibit commerce."
The growth of Internet commerce could help boost U.S. exports of everything from movies and news to software and consulting services. Exports of such products totalled $40 billion in 1995, the draft report noted.
The idea is to hitch U.S. exports to the speeding Internet commerce train. Sales of goods and services online are projected to grow to $7 billion in the year 2000, from about $1 billion this year, according to market researchers at Jupiter Communications.
"Companies have told us there would be a tremendous potential to increase world trade across the Internet if we could provide the right kind of environment," Magaziner said.
The report is especially critical of France, which recently enacted a law that would effectively impose a tax on electronic transmissions. The task force's draft report criticised the policy as an "attempt to regulate the Internet through taxation." The first section of the draft report, titled "Empowering a Free Market for the Global Internet," urged the administration to pursue its war against international regulation of the Internet. It proposed the U.S. government urge other countries to oppose all forms of "discriminatory" regulation, such as taxes or requirements that each country have a physical presence for doing business over the Internet. Taxation should be based on easy-to-apply criteria like the country or state of residence of the consumer, the draft said. The second part of the report urges government assistance for schools and other institutions in the United States to ensure they can buy technology at discount prices. In addition to promoting U.S. technology exports, it also encourages research to better protect the security and privacy of Internet transactions and more research into the effects of the Internet on society and the economy.
For instance, while expressing sympathy for revenue-hungry governments trying to impose taxes, the report said the Internet should be largely exempt from direct taxes such as sales taxes. "Direct taxation of electronic commerce could inhibit its development in two ways: administrative and economic," the draft report said. "The administrative burden on low-margin businesses of collecting, remitting and reconcile multiple taxes is likely to be significant."
Some consumers worry that their privacy will be violated when they shop online. The report said governments should push vendors to disclose what will be done with information about consumers rather than dictate to merchants what they can or cannot do with the data.
On some issues, such as encryption -- encoding information in a scrambled format to provide a measure of security or privacy -- existing administration policies may be seen as conflicting with the free market approach of the draft report.
Magaziner said policies will evolve over time, "but the paper will reflect where we are now."
Magaziner headed Clinton's failed effort to reform the U.S. health care system, an initiative critics said favoured government over the private sector.
While disagreeing with his critics' characterisation of the health care plan, Magaziner said the Internet "is a wholly different animal.
"I'm a problem solver, not an ideologue," he said.