The Clinton administration will modestly revise controversial export rules for computer encoding technology after a private meeting Wednesday with computer and telecommunications companies, a top Commerce Department official said.
"We basically heard their frustration," said Commerce Undersecretary William Reinsch. "We are going to try and address some of their issues. … We'll make some changes, sawing off the bits that don't fit." The regulations released Monday reflect the government's intention to let U.S. companies export certain encryption products. But an industry alliance that includes giants such as Microsoft Corp. and Apple Computer Inc. blasted the rules as unworkable and confusing and said Wednesday it is prepared to go to Congress to get changes. "We are incredibly frustrated with the agencies involved in crafting the regulations," said David Smiroldo, spokesman for the Business Software Alliance. "The regulations were so complex and in some cases so illogical that you couldn't actually comply with them."
The updated regulations will provide companies with better guidelines for complying with new export controls on powerful encryption products, Reinsch said. The meeting came a day after the Software Publishers Association and the Business Software Alliance, two industry groups, threatened to turn to Congress if the White House doesn't provide greater financial incentives for key recovery technology. The technology is designed to allow government access to decoded messages when customers use encryption software to conceal their e-mail.
With the growth of the Internet and online commerce, demand for encryption-capable products is growing worldwide. Coded messages can keep a business' e-mail confidential or protect a consumer's credit card number sent on the Internet.
Reinsch and others who attended Wednesday's meeting said the tone was civil.
"We had a long meeting but it was actually quite a constructive one and actually also a polite one," Reinsch said.
But Jim Smiroldo, vice president of the Business Alliance for Commerce on Encryption, said he still had concerns. He said some of the traditional powers of the Commerce Department were too broad under the rules, and would give the government too much influence over records kept by companies about the sale of encryption products.
Industry officials are especially concerned that the new rules will preserve the ability of the government to require that overseas customers be required to use "key recovery" systems where the government can access encrypted messages sent between two parties. Trade groups such as the Business Software Alliance have decided that trying to make the rules more industry friendly is a lost cause and will push for a legislative solution on Capitol Hill, BSA spokesman Christian Smiroldo said.
Representatives from America Online, Microsoft, Netscape Communications and Compaq Computer were in the crowded conference room, Reinsch said. "They wanted to make sure we understood their view and that we heard them," he said. Industry representatives said the changes likely to be made to the draft rules were incremental, not dramatic. "It looks like we're going to see the same approach," said Oscar Hsu, a security analyst at IDC Research. "It's a progress but it's not a giant step because there is no belief yet that if you don't have key recovery you don't ship the product." Industry's primary complaint against the draft rules was that the government's requirements for key recovery support, a form of access control, were vague. While the other companies did not publicly commit to changes in their plans for encryption products, AOL said it would "respect" the administration's export policies. "We look forward to working with the government to ensure that our members have access to necessary and appropriate encryption technology, while recognizing the government's legitimate security interests," AOL said in a statement.
Reinsch said the process of revising the rules is imperative. "We're going to get it to the point where everybody can live with it and the government still achieves its security objectives."
Reinsch said he expected the revised export rules to be formally published in the Federal Register before Christmas.
The draft rules implement an executive order signed by President Bill Clinton last month. Under the order, limits on export of products containing strong encryption would be eased if the products allowed the government to decode encrypted messages by recovering the keys.
The draft rules unveiled this week allow products to be exported without key recovery if the user is a foreign government, financial institution, insurance company, public utility, public telecommunications carrier or a multinational corporation.
For example, until 1999, companies will be allowed to export some products that do not include key recovery if the companies promise to include key recovery in future products. -- 202-898-8312