A break-in at the U.S. Justice Department's World Wide Web site last week highlighted the Internet's continued vulnerability to hackers.
Unidentified hackers gained access to the department's web page on August 16 and replaced it with a hate-filled diatribe labelled the "Department of Injustice" that included a swastika and a picture of Adolf Hitler.
The incident was a reminder of how hackers can lurk unsuspected in virtual cyberspace, looking for vulnerable computer systems.
"The problem is that there are many other sites on the web that have comparable weaknesses as the Justice Department web site," said Richard Power, editor of Security Focus, an online security magazine.  The hackers who wreaked havoc on the Justice Department site were not caught but experts said the alarm from this cyber crime spree should serve as a wake-up call to organisations that have relied on the false security of passwords and firewalls.  "There's no security on large parts of the Internet," said Bruce Schneier, author of "Applied Cryptography," a bible of sorts for Internet security. "People really don't understand what they need."
The Federal Bureau of Investigation is investigating the incident, and Justice Department officials say the incident did not expose any confidential information.
The incident was the latest in a rash of cyber-break-ins into high-profile web sites. On August 23, a hacker rang up $14,000 in electronic bills by manipulating a flaw in the Oracle Corp. web site. Oracle's web site is used by businesses to obtain updates on the company's software products. And on August 27, hackers broke into the Microsoft Corp. web site and replaced its home page with one of their own - an electronic voodoo doll with Microsoft chief executive Bill Gates' face pinned to its back. In each case, the hackers exploited security holes that allowed them to gain access to the web sites' computers.
The vulnerability of government and corporate web sites is an increasing problem. Some companies are now having to hire people to monitor their sites for break-ins and ensure that their networks remain safe. Security experts blame software flaws and poor security practices - such as using easily guessed codes for network passwords - for the daily problems.
Web security remains an afterthought for many organisations because web sites have been considered part of the corporate public relations machine, rather than an area ripe for attack, experts say. "Some of these are enourmous sites with loads of content and nobody has gone through them and said, 'Let's check everything, start back from the foundations up and make sure this is sound,'" said Mark Elgan, an analyst with International Data Corp.
No one knows how many web sites are vulnerable. "When you're talking about web site security, you're talking about millions of different servers all over the world," Mike Elgan said. "It's a total barnyard out there."
The easily-exploited security flaws have caused a stir in cyberspace, but industry experts said there is plenty administrators can do to protect their web sites. "The most important thing to do is to password-protect the system and then to change the passwords on a regular basis," Power said. "The idea is to make it harder for hackers to get in by making them start from scratch each time." The password-protection basics are taught in most basic web-site design classes, Power said.
Computer Security Institute, General Accounting Office, Nation of Islam, Million Man March, Windows Magazine, U.S. Justice Department, Department of Injustice, Adolf Hitler, Richard Power, Mike Elgan, Fidelity Investments
One site mentioned by Windows Magazine was Fidelity Investments. Fidelity's site advertises its mutual funds and disseminates information about personal finance but does not contain confidential customer information.
Fidelity officials immediately closed the loophole identified by the magazine, a spokeswoman said. But multiple security measures previously in place would have prevented a security breach despite the hole, the spokeswoman added.