The Federal Reserve took another step Friday toward eliminating the barriers between banking and other financial service industries, voting to allow banks to further invade the turf of Wall Street securities firms.
The move was greeted by cheers from major banks, although brokers warned that the limits the Fed was considering were still inadequate.  Under the new rule, approved unanimously, bank subsidiaries would be allowed to derive up to 15 percent of their revenues from underwriting and dealing in securities, a jump from the current limit of 10 percent. The new rule would take effect next year.
Bank subsidiaries have been bumping against the 10 percent limit and earlier this year the Fed cited Swiss Bank Corp. for exceeding the cap.
The decision gives big banks greater flexibility in taking advantage of opportunities to branch out without jeopardizing their traditional banking activities.
"We think it is a very wise move and very positive for our clients and the public," said Thomas Theurkauf, managing director of J.P. Morgan Securities.
Securities firms, however, were not pleased.
"We feel more and more threatened by banks every day," Laura A. Tyson, president of the Securities Industry Association, said. Bank and securities firms have traditionally been fierce adversaries in battles in Congress over modernizing financial laws. Banks have been largely pushing for more flexibility to move into their rivals' areas such as trading and brokerage activity, while securities firms have demanded the banks leave their central holds untouched.
Bruce Thompson, director of government relations at the nation's largest brokerage firm, Merrill Lynch and Co., said he hoped the greater latitude given to banks would not reduce the banks' previous support for Congressional action.
"The greatest service banks can provide is to help the process at the legislative level for removing outdated roadblocks," Thompson said.
The action brought expected calls for a complete overhaul of the nation's aging financial regulatory structure, particularly the Glass-Steagall Act that sets the boundaries between banking and other financial services.
BACKGROUND
For decades, securities underwriting was the exclusive purview of firms like Merrill Lynch and Salomon Brothers.
But since 1987, when the Fed first allowed bank subsidiaries to earn 5 percent of their revenues from underwriting, big banks like J.P. Morgan &amp; Co. and Bankers Trust have made dramatic inroads.
The Fed's announcement Friday comes on the heels of April's move allowing banks to enter other businesses up to 5 percent of total revenue.
The Fed's action will add to pressure on Congress, which was already planning to review the entire scope of financial sector regulation next year.
Bankers are encouraged by the steps taken by the Fed but some are concerned that regulatory changes proposed so far do not even come close to allowing banks and securities firms to compete on an equal footing. Robert Litan, an economist with the Brookings Institution, said the real task falls to Congress. "The Fed can only do so much," he said.
"The fear of the banks before was that if they opened the door and asked for more powers, then others would too," he said.
"This is actually a rather limited and piecemeal approach," Litan said. "What we're seeing is the beginning of a broader movement toward the deregulatory environment we already have in many countries."
The Fed said that by opening the door it in some cases would eliminate the need for Congress to act. In other cases, such as allowing true securities affiliates, the Fed's ability to act was limited.
"We hope that the next move will be up to the Congress in this whole area," Fed Vice Chairwoman Alice Rivlin said.