The Federal Reserve Friday rebuffed a request by the Justice Department to allow U.S. banks to collect data about borrowers as part of an effort to discourage racial discrimination in lending.
At issue is part of a larger debate over how to measure and prevent racial discrimination in lending.
At issue was Regulation B, which was established in 1977 and prohibits banks from collecting information on a borrower's race or gender.
At issue is a request by the Justice Department to alter an existing regulation governing banks' collection of data from borrowers.
It argued that such data was needed to identify patterns of discrimination that might be overlooked without it.
The board's decision comes at a time of increased sensitivity over discrimination and other civil rights issues, and some board members said the decision went far beyond economic matters.
Fed board member Laurence Meyer, in a statement to reporters explaining the decision, said it represented "a judgment among competing interests" and was not "the equivalent of a judgment on the merits of either side of this debate."
"Rather, it is at the center of a heartfelt and ongoing debate in America about the direction of public policy with respect to individual characteristics," he added.
The Fed said it opposed the change without abandoning its commitment to curbing discriminatory lending practices. It promised to step up its monitoring of lending activities and to work with the Justice Department to improve enforcement efforts where possible.
But the board noted that Congress had specifically rejected the idea of collecting such data when it passed the Equal Credit Opportunity Act in 1974. "Congress was cautious about indiscriminate data collection," board member Edward Kelley said. "I, too, am not prepared to take the issue lightly," he added.
Joseph R. Nadol III, assistant director of the Justice Department's enforcement division, told the board that existing studies show statistically significant advantage to white borrowers in the area of business lending but added that more data is needed.
"We believe a state of affairs in which government enforcement agencies are routinely prevented from obtaining the evidence necessary to investigate potential discrimination is intolerable," Schmidt wrote.
"We believe that such data would help to determine whether a particular lender ... is engaging in a pattern or practice of discrimination."
Creditors and their trade associations had opposed the regulation change, which was first released for comment by the Fed in April, 1995.