An international task force working to resolve the simmering controversy over desirable addresses on the Internet released a draft plan Friday for a substantial expansion of the total number of destinations.
The draft proposed seven changes, including adding significant new top-level domains, providing more competition in registering Net addresses and assigning a dispute resolution mechanism for address turf wars.
The seven new domains were included in a formal report issued Friday by the 17-member group, which was made up of representatives from the government, industry, academic and nonprofit organisations.
The Internet currently has nearly 10 million sites using one of seven top-level domains, with 5.5 million using "com" alone. Although the total number of registered sites has increased by 2 million in the past year, growth has been restrained by the shortage of desirable domains. The committee also called for the creation of competing registration services, all of them governed by a not-for-profit organisation known as the Domain Name Clearinghouse.
The controversial firm that currently oversees the Internet naming system, Network Solutions Inc. of Herndon, Va., would continue to handle the registration of current top-level domain names, such as ".com," the committee said.  The panel, composed of 18 technical and legal experts, also proposed the creation of noncommercial top-level names such as ".int" and ".arts" and even country codes, such as ".jp" for Japan.
Under the proposed plan, businesses would be able to choose any name for the addresses, rather than having to obtain permission from a central authority as is currently the case with .com, .org and .net addresses. The new top-level domains could then include general interest domains, such as .web, .arts and .info, and geographical domain names, such as .eu for Europe and .asia for Asia.
"This is a major step forward," said Jonathan Heath, chairman of the committee. "The report should allow more companies and more organisations join the 'Net now with addresses that truly reflect what they do."
The European Union, which recently urged the rules be changed, has spoken favourably on the draft. This plan, which needs to be implemented by June, should bring much-needed competition to the domain name system.
The goal is to reduce the likelihood of disputes over Internet addresses because it is often possible to have only one address with each three-letter ending. For example, there can be only one _mtv.com_ site.
The expansion is a response to situations where trademarks have been seized upon by people who foresaw the commercial potential of the Internet, and could not be easily resolved in the barn-door-closed chaos that is the Internet's address system.
For example, Panavision Inc., a film equipment firm, won an out-of-court settlement recently from a group running Panavision.com.
The IAHC also recommends creating a so-called "uniform dispute-resolution policy" that would specify how trademark owners would retain control of their cyberspace trademarks regardless of who registers them.
The IAHC recommends limiting the number of prefered generic top-level domains to seven - .com, .net, .org, .int, .firm, .store and .web. The proposed .web and .store domains are not currently used. The panel also proposed that a new body, the Domain Nam Supporting Organisation, be created to help police the Internet addresses and authorise new firms to handle registrations. The body would include representatives from business, technical and intellectual property organisations and be linked to the Internet Society.
The committee, which included representatives from industry and governments, also recommended that the Internet, or domain name, system be hoved to a not-for-profit organisation, such as the Internet Society and that Network Solutions relinquish its role as both the registration agency and the registry that tracks all the Internet addresses.
The committee also included representatives from the International Telecommunications Union, the World Intellectual Property Organisation and the International Trademark Association.