An international task force charged with resolving the simmering controversey over desirable Internet address names released a draft plan Friday to expand the total number of addresses substantially.
International Ad Hoc Committee on domain names, formed by the Internet Society in October, said seven new "top level domains" should be added to the Internet.
Most Internet addresses end with one of a few three letter designations, including "com" for private sites, "gov" for government sites and "edu" for sites run by schools.
Addresses for most designations, or top level domains, are given out by Network Solutions Inc of Herndon, Va., which charges $100 for each registration.
In the draft proposal, they also proposed adding a new set of top level domains to be managed by a Canadian firm called CORE, which would allow private firms and organizations to register names and to collect registration fees. International applicants would be able to obtain names through a "name registry" managed by CORE, the statement said, and each participating registry could compete to register addresses.
At first, Network Solutions would continue to have a monopoly on the domain names it already controls but the committee said its "ultimate goal" is to have all names handled by all qualifed firms.
"The IAHC members were faced with a formidable challenge," Donald Heath, president the Internet Society and chair of the committee, said. "We accomplished our goal, in no small part, because we were able to bring people together from around the world, via the Internet."
The committee proposal must still be adopted by the Internet Society, then passed to the US government for final approval.
New names and competing registration services should help quell disputes over popular or trademarked names.
Disputes are arising more frequently, usually when the holder of a trademark discovers that someone else is using their trademark as the name of an Internet site.
In October, the Internet Society formed the International ad hoc Committee on domain names to consider expanding the number of names available. The committee agreed that the Network Solutions monopoly should be terminated as soon as possible.  Currently, if 10 people want to use the same name for a website, only one can register for it and the other nine must choose different names or negotiate with the holder of the name.
Once new top-level domain names are available, 10 people could register similiar names.  The new top level domains will contain three to five letters but have not yet been selected.
The committee included members from the Internet Society, the Internet Assigned Number Authority, which oversees certain Internet standards, and the Internet Architecture Board, which helps draft and promulgate new standards.
The committee also included representatives from the International Telecommunications Union, the World Intellectual Property Organization and the International Trademark Association.
((--202-898-8312))