U.S. banks will be able to significantly increase their securities underwriting activities under a rule adopted Friday by the Federal Reserve, but that will only add pressure on Congress to overhaul the entire regulatory system, market participants said.
The Fed voted unanimously to raise the limit on banks' securities underwriting to 25 percent of total revenues, up from an earlier limit of 10 percent, and also narrowed the various rules governing which kinds of securities banks could underwrite.
The rule follows a 1998 U.S. Supreme Court ruling that struck down regulations that limited bank associations to 10 percent of their revenue from such activities.
The Fed, however, did not go as far as many industry participants had hoped. It stopped short of raising the threshold at which the prohibition kicks in from a 10 percent revenue limit to a 50 percent limit. That could only be done through a clarification or repeal of the Glass-Steagall Act, enacted during the Great Depression to restrict the relationships between banking and securities activities.
"The Fed's action is a very positive step that removes a major impediment to banks' ability to compete with other financial firms in the securities markets," Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan said. "But it cannot by itself bring about the necessary modernization of the entire legal and regulatory system governing financial services."
The limit replaces the current 10 percent of revenues that banks can derive from such activities. It was proposed last fall, and the Fed added the call for Congressional action in the final version. Congress approved a 1997 bill revising securities laws, but Sen. Phil Gramm (R-Texas) has introduced legislation to repeal sections of the 1933 Act that are still enforced today. Congress has failed to act on previous attempts to change the existing rules, which were designed to prevent a bank from having too much power over the economy.
The 10 percent ceiling on the amount of revenue that such securities firms could earn from underwriting and dealing securities has been in place since 1989, when the Fed imposed it to clarify the scope of activities allowed under the Bank Holding Company Act.
The Fed said it currently authorizes 41 bank subsidiaries to deal and underwrite securities, ranging from stocks and bonds to commercial paper and mortgage-backed securities.
Under the new rule, the subsidiaries would be able to generate up to 25 percent of their gross revenues from securities activities. The previous limit was 10 percent.
The rewrite of the law would affect the entire industry—not just banks. Market participants expect that the industry will push for a comprehensive reform package. Robert Litan, a fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington, said the section 20 change could create an atmosphere in which all financial services industries have a stake in rewriting the laws.
Last month, the Comptroller permitted national banks to underwrite and trade in all kinds of debt and equity securities regardless of section 20. The new rules come as Congress prepares to start hearings over the need to revise the Glass-Steagall Act. The banking and securities industries have long pushed for deregulation, but the insurance industry and consumer groups have argued the act protects savers from risk and provides a check on conflicts of interest.
Now, all industries will press for change, Litan said. "The tables have been turned," he said. "But it's not a two-way street. Other industries will want to level the playing field."
The Fed's decision has the potential to be the most significant change in bank activity allowed in more than 70 years, some experts said.
"This is a tremendous boost for banks that already underwrite securities and an incentive for banks considering this business," American Bankers Association managing director Larry LaRocca said.
The Fed's action will make it easier for banks to offer a wider array of services, of most benefit to small community banks which do not have the resources to compete with Wall Street giants, LaRocca said.
The Federal Reserve action drew immediate criticism from securities firms, who said it was unfair that banks got the benefit of a rule change and securities firms did not.
"It's as if Santa Clause delivered all the gifts to only one house in the neighborhood," Steve Judge, senior vice president for the Securities Industry Association, said.
Judge also called for Congress to act. "Nothing could benefit consumers and our economy more than a modernization of federal laws governing the financial services industry," he said.
((202-898-8312))