The Federal Reserve took another step Friday toward eliminating the barriers between banking and other financial service industries, voting to allow banks to further invade the turf of Wall Street securities firms.
The Fed Board of Governors voted unanimously to increase the percentage of revenue bank subsidiaries may earn from underwriting and dealing in securities to 25 percent from 10 percent.
Bank subsidiaries have been bumping against the 10 percent limit and earlier this year the Fed cited Swiss Bank Corp. for exceeding the cap.
Banks were elated by the new rule.
"Today's action will contribute substantially to our mission of increasing economic efficiency by allowing banks to expand and improve their service to customers," Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan said during the board meeting.
But securities companies, who had sought only a modest increase to 15 percent, accused the Fed of not going far enough to level the playing field.
"It's as if Santa Clause delivered all the gifts to only one house in the neighbourhood," said Steve Judge, senior vice president for the Securities Industry Association.
For decades, securities underwriting was the exclusive purview of firms like Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. and Salomon Brothers. But since 1987, when the Fed first allowed bank subsidiaries to earn 5 percent of their revenues from underwriting, big banks like J.P. Morgan &amp; Co. and Bankers Trust have made dramatic inroads.
While the 1933 Glass-Steagall Act generally prohibits banks from engaging in non-bank activity, under section 20 of the Act banks may affiliate with firms not "engaged principally" in such areas. Currently, 41 bank "Section 20" subsidiaries have permission to engage in underwriting.
The Fed's action will add to pressure on Congress, which was already planning to review the entire scope of financial sector regulation next year.
Securities firms, insurance companies and others who opposed lifting restriction on banks in the past will likely favour reform this time around, according to Robert Litan, director of economic studies at the Brookings Institute.
Raising the revenue cap, and an announcement last month by the Comptroller of the Currency allowing banks another avenue for entering unrelated fields, only go halfway, Litan said.
"While both experiences with the 10 percent cap and the Section 20 loophole have been beneficial, they only scratch the surface of what liberalizing legislation would accomplish," Litan said.
The Fed defended its moves saying they were needed to maintain competitive balance in the banking and financial service industry.
"We hope that the next move will be up to the Congress in this whole area," Fed Vice Chairwoman Alice Rivlin said.