The Federal Communications Commission proposed Tuesday to trim the $23 billion a year that long-distance telephone companies pay to local service providers in access fees.
The proposed cutback is part of the FCC's effort to make local and long-distance phone service more competitive and benefit consumers. A final ruling is expected late next year.
In a notice of proposed rule-making, the commission said it could cut the access fees in either of two ways: it could impose a schedule of long-distance access charge reductions or wait to allow market forces to drive fees lower.
Critics believe the fees -- which make up about 40 percent of all long-distance charges -- are excessive, because they have not been changed since 1984, even though costs have fallen.  The regulation of long-distance rates and access fees has become increasingly complex as the telecommunications industry rapidly changes. With its notice, the FCC proposed to become more active in setting the fees that long-distance companies pay to local service providers for the right to use their networks. Currently, the fees are based on federal and state regulations and tariffs. The prospect of long-distance rates being slashed sent telephone stocks into a sharp decline Tuesday, including in Amsterdam, where KPN stock fell nearly 6 percent.
New telecommunications rules signed into law in February are supposted to foster more competition for local and long-distance service and drive prices lower.
Long-distance providers like AT&amp;T Corp. cheered the commission for tackling the access fee issue after years of debate. They argue that the fees are inflationary and exceed their costs for carrying long-distance calls over local lines.
Is the proposed FCC rule going to: A. Impose access fees on Internet service providers B. Cut the access fees in either of two ways C. Foster more competition for local and long-distance service D. Allow market forces to drive fees lower
Local service providers said the access fees represent a fair return for the use of their telephone lines.
The FCC "must not allow the long-distance companies to continue to benefit at the expense of consumers," said Roy Neel, president of the U.S. Telephone Association, which represents local service providers.
The notice also said the agency was considering changes in the way access fees for local phone service are calculated.
The proposed changes to the access charges, which would need to be approved after a comment period, would take effect on April 1. The notice of proposed rule-making seeks to resolve a debate over two approaches to cutting fees. The one endorsed by the FCC would combine elements of both.  Under the so-called "market-driven approach," intrastate access charges would be frozen at their current levels until customers have sufficient choices in the local telephone market. At that point, the access fees could be cut by a formula based on a complex system of rate averaging.
The alternate approach would specify the nature and timing of changes in existing rate levels. Ultimately, the FCC said it could adopt parts of both approaches.
The agency also proposed eliminating access charges between local service providers and wireless companies but left unchanged local-to-local access fees.  The FCC proposed to protect rural phone service providers from the effects of lower access fees by allowing rural and small companies to ask for subsidies. A portion of the long-distance fees paid by AT&amp;T, MCI WorldCom Inc. and Sprint Corp. would be set aside to help cover the costs of providing phone service to rural and underserved areas.
Recently, several Baby Bells complained that Internet users were getting a free ride, tying up local lines with often lengthy calls.
The FCC said it expects to receive comments on all aspects of Internet access charges, including whether to impose access fees on ISPs. It said it will consider the legal authority it has to do so, as well as issues involving technical capability.  FCC Chairman Reed Hundt said Tuesday the agency was not endorsing a position on the Internet fee issue. He said the agency's decision would be based on what would be "best for consumers, best for economic growth, best for the development of the Internet."
Comments are due by Jan. 27 on the long-distance access fee proposals and by Feb. 21 on the Internet issue.