The Federal Communications Commission has tentatively decided not impose fees on Internet service providers for use of local telephone lines, an official said Thursday.
The decision, tentatively made Wednesday by the commission in Washington, opposes one of the key goals of local telephone companies. The panel is expected to make a final ruling within the next few weeks.
The decision not to impose fees means that both companies offering consumer Internet services such as America Online and long-distance phone companies such as AT&T will continue to pay the same access fees. It was not immediately clear if smaller companies offering Internet connections, such as independent service providers, also were affected by the commission's decision.  Kevin Werbach, a policy analyst with the nonpartisan research group the Progress & Freedom Foundation, said the commission had made a "tentative decision" against extending the access fees to Internet service providers. This decision was part of the notice of proposed rulemaking.
The long-distance telephone companies had argued requiring Internet companies to pay access fees would level the playing field and allow them to compete for customers more easily.
The commission will have to decide, however, if access fees should apply to Internet calls which actually use regular phone lines.  "We have a remarkable agreement to disagree," Werbach said. "The commission raised the issue and most of the parties on both sides of the argument made strong, passionate cases. Ultimately, the commission did not go in either direction."  Long distance companies such as AT&T cheered the commission's move.  "We're delighted that the FCC has made this important step in recognizing that access fees should apply to similar competitive services," said Manny Schecter, AT&T's vice president of government affairs. "This is an important principle for the ongoing process."  Internet service providers were also pleased with the decision.
The FCC expressed its views in the proposed rulemaking but did not elaborate on its preliminary conclusion, Werbach said.
Werbach said the commission had decided not to issue a notice of proposed rulemaking on applying access fees to Internet service providers. However, he said, the issue will remain on the table as the commission looks for a way to reduce access fees to long distance companies.
The commission noted that access fees are designed to help pay for local phone service and help keep rates low, and asked whether Internet companies should "make some contribution" to those goals.
A notice of inquiry seeks comment but does not give the commission authority to then adopt a rule. The commission would have to first issue a notice of proposed rulemaking before applying access fees to Internet service providers, Werbach said.
The Internet notice is "more foward looking" than the proposed rules for long distance access fees, Werbach said. "Once we have an idea what replaces the access charge system then we can take a look at that," he said.