The Commerce Department will issue final rules on Dec. 30 to implement its new policy on export of computer encoding products, but the proposal is unlikely to mollify the software industry and privacy advocates who objected to a draft version.
The rules will delineate different levels of software exports, including an exemption for products with special features that would allow government officials to decode encrypted messages. The Bush Administration has said the rules are intended to give law enforcement officials the tools to access coded messages when acting under proper legal authority.
The rules specify which computer products requiring export licenses contain encryption code and which are eligible for one-time review or six-month renewable license.
The final rules will be the first government policy to govern the worldwide export of products containing encryption -- scrambles of digital data that senders and receivers use to ensure privacy and security.
In the past, products could be exported using "keys" as long as 40 digital bits, a string of forty ones and zeros. But as the speed of computers has grown, 40-bit keys have become easy to crack and longer keys have come into general use.
At the same time, with the growth of the Internet and online commerce, demand for encryption-capable products is growing worldwide. Coded messages can keep a business' e-mail confidential or protect a consumer's credit card number sent on the Internet.
The Commerce Department rules were intended as a compromise, allowing U.S. companies to compete in the encryption market while protecting the interests of law enforcement officials.
Under the rules, companies would be able to export products containing key lengths of up to 56 bits. The keys must be recoveryable, meaning the software would allow for the retreival of the password or key if a government, such as law enforcement, needed to do so in the course of an investigation.
Under the policy to be issued Monday, products containing key recovery features will be eligible for export after a one-time review.
The rules would allow exports of non-key recovery software with keys of up to 64 digits, the strongest commercially available encryption standard, without a license.
The software industry, however, argued that requiring key recovery on real-time data risks destroying the confidentiality of messages and warned the rules could turn off foreign customers. Privacy advocates said the rules could give the government the authority to tap telecommunications.
Software makers had hoped for unfettered export of their products without key recovery features, but the final rules kept them restricted with export licenses.
The final rules also changed a definition of key recovery from one that only applied to government agents to a more general definition which includes private individuals. The rules now say key recovery applies to any agent "designated by the user to store and recover encryption keys."
Privacy advocates had blasted the draft rules as an unnecessary government intrusion in the personal lives of citizens.
Privacy and computer security advocates had objected that this could lead to the export of U.S. versions of such products that are much less secure than European models. However, foreign key management systems may still be used to unlock coded products.
A criteria listed as "public support for a key management infrastructure," was changed to "or other support for the key management infrastructure."