House Banking Committee chairman Jim Leach introduced a bill on Tuesday aimed at remaking the regulatory landscape for banking and other financial services in the United States.
Leach, an Iowa Republican, unveiled the bill at a news conference. It faces more hurdles this year than Leach's first financial modernization bill a year ago, when the Republican leadership in the House of Representatives became bogged down in the budget debate and the issue died.
Leach's bill, HR 10, The Financial Services Competition Act of 1999, reflects minor modifications to the original proposal, such as eliminating the requirements that states comply with the legislation.
"The Leach bill is still alive, despite the fact that he made political turmoil for the House leadership," said Edward Yingling, executive director of government relations at the American Bankers Association. "It's too early to tell whether the leadership would decide to squash the bill." Leach said the bill would allow banking firms to sell customers an array of financial products from within one corporate family. The change would benefit customers of banks, thrifts and other financial firms by enhancing their access and making services more affordable, Leach said.
"Not only will there be more products available to banking customers who are looking to maximize their savings, but efficiencies should lower industry costs and therefore costs to consumers," Leach said.
Leach's bill comes during a period of deregulation of the banking and other financial services industries. The bill would amend the Glass-Steagall Act and other laws to remove the legal obstacles faced by banks when they enter nontraditional fields such as securities underwriting and insurance.
Leach's bill comes a few months after two government agencies cleared the way for banks and other financial institutions to expand into each others' businesses.
The Federal Reserve voted Dec 20 to allow bank subsidiaries to garner a greater share of revenue from underwriting activity. And a month earlier, the Comptroller of the Currency's office said it would allow banks to enter an array of non-bank markets.
Leach said his bill would repeal Section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act and amend Section 32 to allow for the merger of commercial and investment banks.
The bill's repeal of Section 32 - which allows certain companies to buy up to 10 percent of a bank's stock - would apply to all entities, including insurance companies. Insurance companies are currently restricted to owning no more than 5 percent of a bank's stock. The bill also would permit direct corporate ownership of insurance companies and direct insurance activities by banks as well as create two new powers for banks, securities and insurance: The new powers would allow banks to merge with securities firms and acquire insurance companies, and they will create a limited power for financial holdings companies to engage in multiple lines of commerce. This would give companies offering both securities and banking products the same protection as banks enjoying a "banker's bank" exemption.
Leach's bill would also create a "Universal Charters Act" to create an alternative chartering system that would provide national banking powers to companies within any state. He said it would require the creation of national banking standards, regulatory procedures, agency oversight and consumer protections. The bill would merge the Office of Thrift Supervision into the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and create the Office of Financial Supervision to help coordinate the activities of the Federal Reserve, OTS and OCC. The bill calls for an advisory council be created to give thrift customers a voice in regulators' rulemaking.
Regulators and financial institutions would be able to agree to allow a single holding company to engage in activities both permitted and prohibited by Section 20 if the activities are kept separate. These activities however must not be linked in a way that would give rise to a conflict of interest between or among customers. Leach said his bill requires that the Federal Reserve give greater consideration to consumer protection in approving mergers between banks and securities firms. Leach's bill also requires the Fed to act within 120 days on applications to engage in securities activities. The legislation also contains language that calls for a study of the impact of market activities on competition and consumer protection and study by the Treasury Department on the feasibility of creating a superbank charter.
Leach has scheduled a hearing on his bill at a House Banking subcommittee Wednesday. The subcommittee is expected to approve it that day.
1. What does the bill introduced by Jim Leach aim to do? 2. What decision by Leach might turn the leadership against his bill? 3. Whom does the bill benefit ultimately? 4. How have bank regulators already begun eroding the barriers for banks? 5. What other activities are to be allowed for bank subsidiaries? 6. What will happen to the federal charter for thrifts under this bill? 7. Who are the other sponsors of this bill? 8. Where can the text of Leach's bill be found?
The text of Leach's bill is available under the "daily update" section of the Banking Committee's World Wide Web site, http://www.house.gov/banking/.
((202-898-8312))