An influential Internet organisation has backed away from a proposal to dramatically expand the number of addresses available on the global computer network.
The Internet Society, which helps develop and coordinate Internet standards, announced this week that instead of moving ahead with the proposal it would form a nine-member committee to study the issue.
Previously, the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority called for up to 150 new top-level domains that companies and individuals could use for descriptive or "vanity" addresses on the Web. Many organisations and individuals had objected to the plan,
"There just seems to be no consensus at all," said Don Heath, president of the society. A variety of objections and questions have been raised about the August proposal, from technical networking issues to concerns about protection for trademarks and intellectual property.
"We thought we should try to pull it all together and have a good cross-section of people to discuss it and see if we can't reach a consensus," he said.
The new committee ought to finish its work by early next year and new names could be doled out four to six months later, Heath said. The committee could decide not to go forward with any address expansion, but Heath said that was an unlikely outcome.
The committee's main task will be to define how the new addresses should be managed and who will legally control them.
Disputes over Internet names are occuring with increasing frequency as more companies seek to publicise and market their products over the Net.
For example, Viacom Inc.'s MTV cable music channel fought with one of its employees who had registered "mtv.com," eventually regaining control of the name in an out-of-court settlement.
Every site on the World Wide Web must have a unique address name. Most addresses end with one of a few three letter designations, known as top-level domains, including "com" for private sites, "gov for government sites and "edu" for sites run by schools.
In August, Internet Assigned Numbers Authority said it would oversee the creation of up to 150 new top level domains, easing the squeeze, especially for names in the private sector category.
The authority, operating under charter from the society and the Federal Network Council, is the central coordinator of Internet addresses and other standards.
The society's board of trustees voted in June to accept a preliminary version of the numbers authority proposal, with the proviso that the business aspects of proposal be fleshed out.
But the reviews of the proposal - including from members of the society's own business constituency - were unexpectedly harsh, prompting the formation of the new committee.
The committee will be composed of six members appointed by the Internet Society and three members appointed by outside groups. The society will appoint two members from the technical community , two from the Internet business community, and two from international trade and trademark organisations.
The International Telecommunication Union, the World Intellectual Property Organisation and the International Trademark Association will each appoint one member.