Fast running out of options, federal credit unions are hoping the Supreme Court will decide Friday to wade into the midst of their six-year legal battle with the banking industry.
The issues before the court are important enough that the justices have held off for months from deciding whether they should hear the case.
At stake is the membership structure of the country's 10,100 federal credit unions, which serve 46 million members. Cost concerns have driven small businesses, farm bureaus and even some religious denominations to join credit unions, which pay no taxes and are loosely regulated by the National Credit Union Administration.
At stake are the rights of some of the nation's largest credit unions either to enlarge their memberships or to stay just as they are. If the court takes the case, the credit unions would get another chance to defend their right to expand.
If the court decides not to hear the case, membership limits could force many credit unions to be dissolved or broken up into smaller, less-efficient institutions, according to Tim Pryor, federal regulatory counsel to the National Association of Federal Credit Unions.
Welcoming the opportunity  Credit unions, already damaged by the effects of the lower court ruling, are hoping for another chance. "There would obviously be tremendous relief if the Supreme Court decided to hear the case," said Pryor. He said credit unions would welcome the opportunity to argue the distinction between state and federal credit union charters, an issue of contention that hasn't been completely resolved. "There hasn't been a case heard on this subject since 1934, and a lot has happened since then," he said.
The case involves more than four million credit union members nationwide. Credit unions have grown in size and importance in recent years partly due to the favorable treatment they get from Congress and the courts. The industry has warned that a ruling against them could force several credit unions out of business and could cost as many as 1.5 million people their source of low-cost financial services. "We still think the court should grant a review of this case," Pryor said. "Our concern is that massive disruption of the marketplace can take place unless the Supreme Court grants review."
The NCUA believes that its 1982 decision was within its rights and should be permitted to stand. Amicus briefs filed by the Justice Department, several state attorneys general and local governments also have supported the credit unions.
"This is about settled law," said Michael Crotty, counsel for the American Bankers Association. If credit unions want to change the membership limits, they should go to Congress and ask for legislation, he said.
The lawsuit has hinged on a dispute over the limits on who can belong to a credit union - the so-called common bond.
At issue is a 1982 policy that allowed some credit unions to solicit members in more than one "field of membership" so long as the groups had something in common, such as place of employment, church or even a neighborhood.
The banks claim that by allowing multiple groups to be admitted as credit union members, the NCUA was violating the Federal Credit Union Act, which they said limited membership to a single common bond. The banks sued in 1997.
The ABA argued that credit unions should not be allowed to include members from unrelated groups, eliminating the cooperative's single common bond.
The appeals court ruling came last June, too late for the credit unions to seek for appeal to the Supreme Court over the summer. By December, the clock had run out. The credit unions asked for an extension for time to file an appeal, which the justices granted.
The high court earlier this year declined to hear a similar case involving a Texas credit union.
It is possible that the justices might not get to the case Friday, and then it would likely be discussed at a conference next month, lawyers said.