The growing mass of Internet users have paid their fair share to local telephone companies and pose little threat to the phone system, a study by a group of Internet and computer companies said Wednesday.
The four-month study, conducted by The Internet Access Coalition, also found that second phone lines added to homes and businesses to access the Internet brought in substantial revenues to local telephone companies. The coalition, which includes America Online, Prodigy, Microsoft, UUNet and others, study the regulatory and legal issues surrounding the Internet.
The new study was funded by a group of New York City-based technology and Internet access companies, including Mindspring Enterprises Inc., Compuserve Inc. and AT&T Corp. "Everyone is paying their way," said David Miller, president of Millennia Digital Systems Inc., an Internet service provider.
The coalition includes Microsoft Corp., America Online Inc., CompuServe Corp. and Prodigy Communications Inc.
The Federal Communications Commission said on Dec. 24 that it had tentatively decided not to impose access fees on Internet providers similiar to those paid by long-distance companies to local phone companies.
The Internet Access Coalition study, which was funded by some of the biggest computer companies and online providers, including America Online Inc. and Microsoft Corp., sought to accuse local phone companies of exaggerating claims of system congestion and network damage caused by the Internet. The study examined the phone system from an engineering standpoint, focusing on the probable impact of Internet usage.
The new report, written by Jonathan Sallet, a partner in the Washington office of law firm Hogan & Hartson and former legal advisor at the FCC, challenges the phone company claims. Sallet concluded that phone companies have not introduced any new technology or architecture to handle the surge in Internet traffic onto their networks. "For now, our assessment is that it doesn't appear that the telephone companies have had to bear a significant cost burden in providing Internet access services," Sallet said.
The coalition includes 17 companies, including Microsoft, Netscape, AT&T, UUNet and AOL.
The alliance also includes Cisco Systems Inc., Netscape Communications Corp., Microsoft Corp. and the Computer and Communications Industry Association and the Electronic Industries Alliance.
The coalition's study dismissed last year's reports by local phone companies.
"To my knowledge, these local conversations are not congested," said Dave Mitchell, a Southwestern Bell spokesman based in Arkansas. The study by the Denver-based law and consulting firm TeleStrategies and the University of Denver's Center for Telecommunications Management said claims by phone companies of a system near capacity are misleading because the companies have large reservoirs of excess capacity.
Some of the member of the Internet coalition, which includes America Online Inc., Microsoft Corp., US West Inc. and MCI Communications Corp., do pay fees under special contracts, Selwyn acknowledged. But those fees vary widely and are almost entirely waived, he said. The study also focussed on Internet use as a small part of the entire phone system. The long-distance network, for example, carries more than 1,000 times more Internet traffic than the local-access network and accounts for 95 percent of all Internet traffic, the study said. The local phone system, meanwhile, carries less than 0.8 percent of all Internet traffic, the study said. In fact, the telephone system ranks only sixth among the various networks carrying Internet traffic, it said. The study also concluded phone companies have enough surplus capacity to prevent congestion, at least in the short term. The phone companies say they need to impose access fees because Internet usage is causing congestion at switchs between local-access networks and the rest of the system. The company studies said such "untolled" calls cost them around $3 billion to $7 billion a year.
"This issue is not about one Internet service provider," Mitchell said. "It's an industry-wide issue." The new study offered several explanations for why Internet use might not tax the system. For instance, the authors point out that most telephone users connect to the Internet for only a few hours a day.
Selwyn said the phone companies could quickly solve any current or near-term congestion problems by making minimal investments. The local phone companies also have profited from the creation of additional lines - even as their studies warned of possible congestion.
In a speech to the Texas Public Utility Commission in October, US West Inc. chairman Solomon Trujillo said second lines were important to "generate additional revenue."
The Internet and computer companies also said that their study showed that telephone companies make a windfall in profits from rented second phone lines installed mainly by Internet subscribers.  The costs of a second phone line and associated use charges are often several times the cost of establishing the new line and the accompanying telephone call traffic, they said.
The coalition, including such technology giants as Microsoft Corp., Compaq Computer Corp. and Oracle Corp., called on the government and the phone companies to look for technological solutions to local phone system capacity issues. It also insisted that, although local phone companies should be allowed to charge extra for extra capacity to meet excess demand, the charges should not be passed along to Internet users.
Local phone companies previously argued that people were increasingly bypassing long-distance companies by communicating through the Internet and that they should get access fees as compensation.  But the study released Wednesday found that the total Internet traffic flowing through the phone network was only two percent of domestic long-distance traffic in 1995.  The Internet coalition urged the Federal Communications Commission to impose a $1,500 limit on the connection charges Internet companies pay per month for direct access to the phone network.  The group also recommended that the FCC encourage local phone companies to combine their signalling and voice networks, as AT&T and Nynex Corp. have done, to reduce capacity bottlenecks. AT&T calls its combination SNEAK, or low-rate circuit switching. It essentially splits the switchs into two networks, so that they are not overwhelmed by Internet callers.
The phone companies say such measures require massive investments, while the Internet companies contend the current system is adequate.
"Technological solutions are readily available," Paul Misener, chairman of the Internet coalition's steering committee said.