Prospects for comprehensive reform of U.S. banking and financial services laws remain bright despite a far-reaching proposal being considered by the Clinton Administration that has upset some banks.
Most in government and the industry now agree that the 60-year-old Glass-Steagall Act separating banking from other financial activities like insurance and securities dealing should be scrapped.
But there is little consensus about removing the barriers between financial firms and other commercial companies, a position the administration is actively considering for its reform proposal expected in the next two months.
"The feeling is still very, very good that everyone wants Glass-Steagall reformed," former Congressman and bank lobbyist Larry LaRocco said.
With almost two years left for the 105th Congress, legislators should have sufficient time to come to agreement, added LaRocco, managing director of the American Bankers Association's securities section.
Enacted during the height of the Great Depression, the Glass-Steagall Act requires banks to choose between the securities and the banking businesses. Banks have fought for years against the law, citing a diminishing competitive edge against European and Japanese rivals.
Most of the leading banking legislative proposals, including bills sponsored by House Banking Committee Chairman Jim Leach and Representative Marge Roukema, share a broad consensus on what to do away with the Depression-era laws requiring the separation of banking and non-banking functions.
As previously reported, Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin is weighing the recommendations of a task force headed by Under Secretary John Hawke to remove all barriers between financial and non-financial companies. Under the plan, a company like General Electric Co. or Microsoft Corp. could own or be owned by a financial services company like Citicorp or Aetna.
"There has been an enormous amount of movement on the whole issue in the last two months," a person familiar with the administration's deliberations said.
However, the person said the administration has yet to reach a final decision. The administration still could adopt parts of the Hawke plan and combine them with other parts of measures pending in Congress, the person said. "The idea is still on the table," the person said. Such an approach could make for an easier passage, industry sources said. "The talk is that you could end up with a compromise that makes everybody a little bit happy," one source said.
The remaining "hang-up" has raised strong opposition from House Banking Committee Chairman Jim Leach along with smaller banks and consumer groups.
"There is no public support and no economic need for the conglomeration of financial institutions and other businesses," the Iowa Republican said. "The nation needs to be concerned about creating jobs, not simply consolidating ownership."
Striking a compromise on the issue might be difficult. "The question still lingers, how far do you go and how much effort do you put into making a compromise," said a lobbyist familiar with the issue.
Small bankers agree. "It's a proposal that would essentially change and concentrate not only the financial structure of the United States but the whole economic and financial structure," said Ken Guenther, executive vice president of the Independent Bankers Association of America.
Such concentration would be bad for the economy, Guenther added. "It is based on very debatable assumptions."
One bill in Congress includes a possible compromise approach, lobbyists noted. Representative Marge Roukema's bill would allow banking, insurance and securities firms to merge and would allow such companies to derive up to 25 percent of their revenues from non-financial activities.
The New Jersey Republican, chairwoman of the House Banking Committee's Financial Institutions subcommittee, has lined up some big guns behind her bill. The Alliance for Financial Modernisation, a coalition representing most the large trade groups involved in financial services, broadly endorsed the bill.