With the Clinton administration busily reworking its 1995 proposal overhauling the U.S. financial services sector, one faction in the Treasury Department is recommending a more far reaching plan this time around, people familiar with the matter said.
The proposal, advanced by Undersecretary of the Treasury Larry Summers and Comptroller of the Currency Eugene Hawke, would repeal literally all existing barriers between banking, insurance and securities businesses. Under the plan, a single entity would be allowed to own a bank, a securities firm and an insurance company and conduct any of those activities from one set of offices. It would also allow non-financial companies to own and operated U.S. banks. Detroit's General Motors Corp., for instance, could open a car-loan financing subsidiary.
The Hawke plan is said to be in front of Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin, who carries great weight with the President on financial policy issues.
Most in the administration and on Capital Hill agree that the 60-year-old laws separating banking from other financial activities like insurance and securities dealing should be scrapped.
But there is still widespread disagreement about letting outside companies into financial businesses. "There's a major war brewing," one lobbyist familiar with the plan said. "People are choosing up sides and getting to the White House."
A Treasury spokeswoman would not comment on the plans, noting that all proposals will be considered. She did confirm that a revised fiscal services industry plan is in the works and would be sent to Capitol Hill in June.
Two years ago, the Clinton plan took a middle path on the issue between House Banking chairman Jim Leach's bill and a proposal put forward by Senate Banking Committee chairman Sen. Alfonse D'Amato.
Leach remains strongly opposed to allowing non-financial firms into the financial services sector. The Iowa Republican introduced a bill last month that would allow banks, insurance companies and securities firms to affiliate only amongst themselves.
A second House bill, backed by Rep. Marge Roukema, would allow a financial services company to derive up to 25 percent of its revenue from non-financial activities.
Sen. D'Amato, by contrast, favors lifting all limits, allowing a company like General Electric or Ford to own and operate a bank. D'Amato is expected to reintroduce his bank reform measure in the next few weeks, a spokesman said.
Final decisions on the boarder issue of common ownership will be left up to Rubin, who has the ear of President Clinton, Capitol Hill sources said.
Veteran consumer advocate Ralph Nader wrote a letter to Secretary Rubin last week opposing the Hawke recommendations.
Common ownership "would create powerful conglomerates that would dominate the nation's economy," Nader warned in the letter obtained by Reuters.
The White House "may seriously weaken or eliminate long-established safeguards to preserve the integrity of the nation's banking system," Nader wrote.
Small bankers also oppose the plan, which could lead to further consolidation and concentration in the banking industry, lobbyists said.
((--202-898-8312))