Just days after a U.S. graduate student cracked the most powerful computer encryption system allowed out of the country, the Commerce Department announced it would allow three companies to export an even stronger system.
Commerce granted its approval to three companies, allowing them to sell encryption software products with 56-bit keys, twice as powerful as the 40-bit system previously allowed.  Until now, computer generated encryption software had been regulated by the U.S. government, which feared the technology could be used by terrorists or enemies of the United States to prevent intelligence agencies and law enforcement officials from decoding secret messages.  The government has virtualy prohibited the export of stronger encryption software for several years.
But under a controversial new Clinton administration policy that took effect Jan. 1, companies may recieve permission to export stronger programmes.
"I'm happy that we've been able to do this within the first month without rancour or difficulty," Under Secretary of Commerce for Export Administration William Reinsch said in a telephone interview.
The three companies receive permission to export 56-bit encryption products following a meeting with Commerce Department officials Monday, Reinsch said. The companies must submit two-year business plans and agree to submit source code into government escrow for review.
The approval process has been clouded by criticism from industry and civil liberties groups. Some companies have complained that the process is too cumbersome and they fear that their plans could be made public. In addition, civil libertarians have attacked the plan for permitting government access to decode encrypted information.
The quick approvals should quell some of the criticism and encourage more applicants, Reinsch said.
"As a result of this, you will have more companies taking it seriously and we will expect more plans over the next couple of months," he said.
Encryption was once the realm of spies and generals. But with the explosion of online commerce on the Internet, encryption has become a vital tool for protecting everything from a business' e-mail message to a consumer's credit card number sent over the Net.
The amount of protection afforded by encryption is largely a function of the length of the software key measured in bits, the smallest unit of computer data.
Companies said products with just 40-bit long keys, the old limit, were too easy to crack. The approvals came just days after Ian Goldberg, a graduate student at the University of California, cracked a message encoded with a sofware key 40-bits long.
The government did not name the companies on Friday given permission to export stronger, 56-bit programmes, but Glenwood, Maryland-based Trusted Information Systems acknowledged that it was one of the three.
"Recent attacks on 40-bit encryption have shown that a global move to at least 56-bit (U.S. government standard) security must come soon," Trusted Information Executive Vice President Steven Lipner said.