An influential economic research group is preparing guidelines on computer encryption for its member countries but will duck some of the most contentious issues involved, according to a draft obtained by Reuters.
The Clinton administration, seeking to rally support for its controversial policy on exporting encryption products -- which encode and decode e-mail and other computerized messages -- failed to win an endorsement from the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), although the group did discuss the administration's approach.
"The guide does not dictate a single 'model' policy that governments should adopt," said the draft distributed to journalists, which is expected to be approved late this month.  Rather, it is intended to help countries identify the public interests involved, review their own needs, and decide how best to "regulate and promote the use of encryption." In many areas, the draft report stops short of endorsing administration policy. On U.S. efforts to persuade other countries to adopt its key recovery system -- which provides the government with certain access to decode scrambled messages -- the guidelines simply suggest that governments consider such a system.
The agreement suggests instead that bureaucrats from the OECD's mostly developed-world member states "exchange information on national policies and practices" on encryption exports. The governments' approach to encryption "can make a difference in terms of its impact on inter-operability and secure global networks," the draft says.
On all the controversial areas in the draft, "the member countries of the OECD have strongly held views but they don't always coincide," John Dryden, head of the group's Information, Computer and Communications Policy division, said in a telephone interview from Paris.
Some countries see widespread use of encryption as a way to protect the privacy of computer users and businesses, thereby encouraging global commerce, Dryden said. But others see encryption as possibly thwarting law enforcement's efforts to catch criminals and global terrorists, he said.
The guidelines suggest encryption users should have access to products that meet their needs. Government controls should be "no more than are essential to the discharge of government responsibilities."
The draft puts the burden on governments to ensure the policies they craft allow for "maximum protection of individual liberties," including the right to privacy. It also rejects "totally bans or unregulated environments."
"It's not in itself a cryptography policy and it's not an attempt to draft a model national law that we're encouraging people to adopt," Dryden said. Cryptography refers to products and systems used in encryption.
The guidelines also suggest encryption standards and usage should be "determined by the market in an open and competitive environment."
"There's a strong view that the private sector should have the possibility to use information networks to the best of their potential in order to create growth and jobs," Dryden said.
U.S. officials who have seen the preliminary draft praised the guidelines. "They're an important and helpful step forward," Undersecretary of Commerce William Reinsch said.
"They're helpful because they put down on paper the proper foundation for getting into this," he added.
Reinsch said most countries will follow the U.S. lead and require so-called key recovery features for law enforcement. Under the Clinton policy, domestic use of encryption is not regulated but the strongest coding products cannot be exported unless they include key recovery.
U.S. companies that have opposed the Clinton policy, contending it stifles their ability to compete with unfettered foreign firms, drew little solace from the draft guidelines.
"This is not helpful," said Netscape Communications Corp.'s public policy counsel, Peter Harter. Netscape and other companies preferred stronger language endorsing free-market policies, he said.
The draft guidelines, approved by a group of government and private-sector experts at a meeting at the end of January, still must be approved by a top-level OECD officials from the group's 29 member countries, including the United States, Japan and Germany.