An influential global research group is preparing guidelines on encryption policy for its member countries but will duck some of the most contentious issues involved, according to a draft of the report obtained by Reuters.
The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, made up of 29 member countries including the United States and Japan, is at the heart of world commerce and is attempting to overcome disagreements over how much governments should regulate encryption, a technology used to scramble data and protect privacy, business and government secrets. The negotiation over encryption policy has been a high priority at the OECD, particularly for the United States, which wants to limit export overseas of strong data-scrambling technologies without a way for government authorities to unscramble the code.
The draft "encryption guidelines" stop short of recommending governments impose restrictions on the development and use of cryptography, which scrambles electronic data to protect it from interception.
After indicating that governments should carefully weigh the costs and benefits of imposing so-called key recovery, the draft states "this principle should not be interpreted as implying that governments should, or should not, initiate legislation that would allow lawful access."
Jim Dryden, of the OECD's Center for Global Information Infrastructure, downplayed the significance of the guidelines, saying the document is a blueprint, not a policy.  The report is still in draft form and only will be approved by the OECD's members countries if it reaches consensus. "This is designed to try to start a debate," Dryden said.  "The main purpose here is that we should recognize that various governments have various approaches."
The guidelines show the "fissures" among the OECD's varied members, Dryden added.  "It's a tricky and difficult area," he said. The 29 member countries of the OECD, a Paris-based organization that serves as a think tank and forum for industrialized nations, have divergent opinions on encryption. Some countries take what Dryden described as a libertarian view, for example, that individuals have a right to privacy and should not be interfered with by government regulators.
But others see encryption as possibly thwarting law enforcement's efforts to catch criminals and global terrorists, he said.
The guidelines suggest that encryption users should have "access to cryptography that meets their needs."  Government controls should be "no more than are essential to the discharge of government responsibilities."
The Paris-based research agency, whose members include the United States, Canada, Japan and the United Kingdom, among many others, plans to make a final recommendation to its members later this year.  It is not likely to address controversial issues such as key recovery, Dryden said.
"It's not in itself a cryptography policy and it's not a attempt to draft a model national law that we're encouraging people to adopt," Dryden said.
The guidelines also suggest encryption standards and usage should be "determined by the market in an open and competitive environment."
The draft urges that the use of encryption should not create financial burdens or add delays in data communications.  It also recommends that countries liberalize telecommunications policies and create a legislative framework that is "technology neutral" and, where appropriate, global in scope.
Government officials and industry representatives viewed the draft as a helpful beginning  "It's good for pushing the consensus forward," said David C. Reinsch, undersecretary of commerce for export administration, in a telephone interview.  The U.S. government participated in the study.
"What they're trying to do is identify principles that governments should take into account when they're making their own decisions on encryption," he said.
The 29-member OECD is composed of countries with market-oriented economies, including the United States, Japan and Canada. Its guidelines do not have the status of law.
The draft guidelines, approved by a group of government and private sector experts at a meeting at the end of January, still must be approved by the top-level OECD council.
The council is composed of ambassadors from the 29 member countries.
Private sector experts who have seen the draft guidelines said some of the language is too vague.
"Unfortunately, agencies and firms outside the United States seeking OECD guidance will still have to struggle with non-guidance disguised as guidance," said Richard Clarke, executive director of the OpenDecipherment Coalition, a group of U.S. companies and organizations. He added that the draft document does "not break new ground on the contentious issue of encryption export controls."
((--202-898-8312))