The various sectors of the U.S. financial services industry will spar over bank reform proposals at a hearing on Tuesday before the House Banking Committee's subcommittee on financial institutions.
The lineup at the hearing will pit banks and savings institutions against each other, as well as against insurance companies, mutual funds and other non-traditional bank competitors.
The hearing was called by Committee Chairman Jim Leach, (R-Iowa) following intensified debate last month about how far to go in breaking down the walls between banks and other financial institutions, as proposed by Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin.
However, members of small and regional banks and some consumer groups back restrictions, arguing that financial supermarket coming from merging commercial and financial firms pose to much of a risk and put too much economic power in too few hands.
A Treasury Department task force recommended that the administration's bank reform proposal, expected in about a month, allow mixing of commerce and banking, permitting Ford Motor Co or Microsoft to own Citicorp or BankAmerica.
Under the proposal, companies would have to sell assets and divest businesses exceeding a certain threshold, perhaps 30 percent, the people said. They added that the plan may not set an upper limit on how much a firm can do in the non-financial sectors. That has raised opposition from community and consumer groups, which oppose the idea that companies could own a financial institution but still exceed allowable limits on non-financial businesses. The groups fear that conglomerates could gain pricing power that could be used to take over banks paying below market rates for deposits.
Rep. Jim Leach, the panel's chairman, has been an outspoken critic of unlimited mixing. So much so that some bankers met with him last week to try to soften his stance.
At the meeting betweeen Leach and the bankers, he reportedly warned that Congress plans to scrap many of the laws that have provided a legal safe haven from competition by devising a legislative framework that will level the playing field between banking and other financial services.
Leach told the meeting he plans to introduce legislation to restrict combinations and is likely to make an announcement on that score soon, according to people at the meeting. His staff would not confirm that he made any statement, except to say "there is a new wind blowing and some of the ideas that he mentioned are being absorbed in the broader discussion about banking reform."
At Tuesday's hearing, insurance and savings groups will oppose restrictions on commercial and financial combinations. The mutual fund industry also opposes restrictions.
TRUE/FALSE  1. The Treasury Department task force recommended allowing banking and commercial companies to combine. TRUE 2. Jim Leach opposes allowing financial and commercial companies to combine. TRUE 3. The Federal Reserve Federal Advisory Council met with Representative Jim Leach last week. TRUE 4. All Republicans agree with the standpoint of Jim Leach. FALSE
The officials of the big commercial banks and Wall Street banks will use the hearing to urge Congress to allow for limited combinations in the banking industry. BankAmerica, Citibank, J.P. Morgan and Goldman Sachs will cite international mergers as evidence of the advantages that U.S. banks can gain in size and capital strength through combinations. The big banks will look to bridge the gap between Rubin's sale of the U.S. government's interest in the Resolution Trust Corp. and the administration's bank reform plans, U.S. financial services information sources said.
The AFL-CIO recently sent a letter to the Clinton administration charging that allowing unlimited mergers would drag the U.S. economy back into the 19th century with a "reinstatement of trusts and monopolies," a person who read the letter said.
Leading Democrats, including ranking minority members of House and Senate banking panels Rep Henry Gonzalez and Sen Paul Sarbanes, also favor restrictions.
In the House, some pro-reform Democrats such as Rep John LaFalce are pressing for tougher scrutiny of large combinations.
And in the Senate, Banking Committee chairman Alfonse D'Amato has opposed restrictions and plans to introduce his own bank reform measure soon.
Rep Gonzalez is likely to raise questions about the possible risks to federal deposit insurance funds, some lobbyists said. Gonzalez has said conglomerate combinations should have limited access to deposit insurance.
((--202-898-8312))