An influential Internet organisation has backed away from a proposal to dramatically expand the number of addresses available on the global computer network.
The Internet Society, the closest thing the Net has to a governing body, voted on Saturday to establish a nine-member panel to review the proposal.
The proposal, unveiled by the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority over the summer, would have created some 150 new Internet address categories.  The move was heralded by many for offering relief from the growing crowding of addresses ending in "com," the most popular and enduring designation for private sites.  It was opposed by some trademark holders, who charged the plan would increase their already high costs of protecting their marks on the Internet. Others said it would give the governments of some countries too much control over the Net.
"There has been considerable international debate on various aspects of the proposal with no consensus," Don Heath, president of the society, said in a statement. "It is in the best interest of the continued beneficial evolution of the Internet that these issues be aired and resolved."
Although anyone can register a domain name as long as it isn't already taken, there have been cases in which Web site owners don't get the addresses they want.
Since its founding in the late 1960s, the Internet has relied on a system of numerical addresses for routing messages between computing machines. But in recent years, as the Internet has become popular among everyday users, addresses have come to denote a sites actual name.
Every site on the World Wide Web must have a unique address name. Most addresses end with one of a few three letter designations, known as top-level domains, including "com" for private sites, "gov for government sites and "edu" for sites run by schools.
In August, Internet Assigned Numbers Authority said it would oversee the creation of up to 150 new top level domains, easing the squeeze, especially for names in the private sector category.
The authority, operating under charter from the society and the Federal Network Council, is the central coordinator of Internet addresses and other standards.
The idea quickly encountered strenuous objections from industry groups such as the Software Publishers association, which feared the change would create problems for companies who already had registered for a name in the "com" configuration. The expansion also created confusion among those who already had registered desirable "com" names, as well as those who had invested heavily in advertising them.
The Internet Society has now decided to further delay implementation of the plan by creating a committee composed of nine members to examine the commercial implications of the proposal.
The committee will include three members appointed by the Internet Society, as well as two members each from the Internet Service Providers Consortium, the Domain Name Supporting Organisation and the General Atomics.
The International Telecommunication Union, the World Intellectual Property Organisation and the International Trademark Association will each appoint one member.