The debate over reforming America's financial services sector, a top priority for Congress and the Clinton administration, began in earnest Tuesday.
At their first hearing on the issue, members of the House Banking Committee set out the main elements of pending legislation that would essentially divorce financials from commercial activity. Relatively small differences, however, could cause a huge divide between various banking, insurance, securities and mutual fund groups that had come together to support free-market principles and tear down barriers enacted nearly seven decades ago. Sen. Alfonse D'Amato, the New York Republican who chairs the Senate Banking Committee, has reintroduced legislation that would revoke the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933 and allow far greater financial services convergence than is now possible. Rep. Marge Roukema, a New Jersey Republican and chairwoman of the House Banking's Financial Institutions subcommittee, presented a bill that would allow a limited combination of financial services and commercial firms. Most of the financial services industry, however, support a broader approach.
The bills introduced so far, as well as an administration proposal expected late next month, begin with the same premise: the time is right to scrap the Glass-Steagall Act enacted during the Depression to separate banking from other financial activities like securities underwriting and insurance.
Most in Congress agree. And, for the first time, most financial service company seem to agree as well.
At the hearing of the Subcommittee on Financial Institutions, representatives of banking, insurance, securities and mutual funds all agreed Congress should allow a single entity to span all financial services businesses.
"I believe this represents the new consensus of the banking industry," William Goodwin, president of the American Bankers Association, told the committee.
When Congress passed the Glass-Steagall Act in 1933, it was meant to protect the banking system from possible abuses associated with combining banking and non-depository businesses. The intent was good, but it was accidental that technology developments and financial innovation eventually rendered it obsolete.  Over the past two years, changes in technology and government regulations have all but dismantled the law and a significant reworking by Congress is overdue.
In March, the Supreme Court ruled that banks could sell insurance from towns with fewer than 5,000 people. It following a series of court decisions that freed banks to venture into many aspects of the insurance business.
The Federal Reserve also decided to allow banks to derive up to 25 percent of a subsidiary's revenue from securities activity, an increase from the previous limit of 10 percent. In November, the comptroller of the currency said he would start allowing national banks to enter a host of non-banking businesses.
But insurance companies have neither the benefit of federal rulings nor the exclusive federal charters of banks and savings and loans. So far, many have entered corporate marriages with banks, securities firms and mutual funds, but they have met with limited success as they cannot take advantage of economies of scale.
"The current system doesn't seem to work very well. Someone is always left unhappy," said Kenneth Guenther, executive vice president of the Independent Bankers Association of America.
All the proposals before Congress would level the playing field to some degree and recognise the changes that have shaken modern finance.
"We do not deny the marketplace on which we compete has changed," said Edward Yingling, executive director of government relations with the American Bankers Association, which had been a longtime advocate of diversified banking.
But lawmakers must decide how to structure the combos if they allowed to form.
Proponents for allowing nonfinancial firms to own banks say the combination of a retail presence with deep pockets would increase competition, something banks argue they need to stay alive.
Roukema and D'Amato, a fierce and consistent proponent of deregulation, both proposed to broadly expand the list of "financial activities" a firm can engage in while still being eligible for charters from banking regulators. This would include insurance, securities and investment advice, and would allow, for example, an insurance company to partially own and bank and vice versa. D'Amato's bill would permit virtually unlimited new forms of financial combinations, while Roukema's language is more conservative, allowing no more than a 10-percent stake -- and possibly less -- of a non-financial firm in a financial firm. She said her bill "will provide diversity and option to the American financial consumer, but at the same time be mindful of consumer safeguards and competition."
The D'Amato bill would remove restrictions on commercial entities owning financial companies. The firms could own no more than 25 percent of a financial business smaller than themselves, but they could own up to 10 percent of a larger firm. The Roukema bill goes further than the Leach to control such ownership. Commercial companies could own up to 10 percent of a financial services firm, but no more than 5 percent of any subsidiary of the firm. This would more closely limit a bank, for instance, from being controlled by a commercial firm.
D'Amato called that argument "old-fashioned, old-line thinking." "Competition matches efficiency and consumer choice," he said. In the hearing, the only support for a compromised position was offered by J. Carter Beese Jr., acting chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission. Regulations must foremost "ensure the safety and soundness" of the financial system, Beese said, adding he is willing to compromise on allowing only certain types of mergers. The manner in which the government regulates activities of affiliated companies also remains unresolved. The Roukema and Leach bills would make parent companies liable for the errors of subsidiaries. But D'Amato said such a legal shield would work against the market because it would perpetuate the current system in which little cross-industry competition exists.
Mutual funds have been "knee-deep in affiliations" and "they've never proved a problem in 57 years," said Matt Fink, president of the Investment Company Institute.
Differences also remain regarding regulation of new, diversified financial services companies, although most favoured an approach having various, specialised agencies regulate the relevent portion of each firm's activities.