Internet access providers and others who met with Net-savvy lawmakers said they fear Congress will wreak havoc on cyberspace but are also heartened by the growing number of legislators who understand the global computer network.
Executives from Microsoft Corp., Sun Microsystems Inc., PSINet Inc. and AT&amp;T addressed an unusual gathering Thursday in the Capitol Hill office of Rep. Ron Wyden, an Oregon Democrat and one of the founders of the Congressional Internet Caucus. The 95-member bipartisan group of legislators, which Wyden formed late last year, held the first of a series of meetings to learn more about the Internet as Congress gears up to tackle a host of issues related to the global computer network.
Tom Evslin, a vice president at AT&T Corp., the latest company to enter the Internet access business, said getting the proper governors in place was crucial because the industry was growing quickly. "If we get it right we have a chance to build something that's world-class in a very short period of time," he said. "If we get it wrong, the world is going to pass us by and we won't have a second chance."
Other industry representatives encouraged Congress to allow the rugged cowboy culture of the Wild West to thrive in the virtual frontier. "This is really not a place for rules and regulations," said Barry Schuler, president of America Online Inc. "The Net is the Wild West of the technological age, and we need to have lots of room for that entrepreneurship, innovation and creativity that is so unique to the Net.
Bill Schrader, president of Internet provider PSINet Inc., was more blunt. "Be very careful or you will destroy this industry," he warned.
The nearly 2-year-old caucus is evidence of the growing awareness of the Internet among members of Congress. It began with 17 members and reached 85 by the start of the 105th Congress. However, even these members are only just beginning to tackle the enormity of the issues.
Caucus co-chairman Sen. Robert Torricelli, D-N.J., said he looked forward to the day the government could step in to protect against activities on the Internet such as software piracy and encryption control. "What we lack isn't a general consensus on the importance of the Internet, it's the strategies to protect it," Torricelli said.
Evslin said the caucus is important for enabling legislators to talk among themselves instead of relying solely on lobbyists and industry representatives. "It's nice to have somebody who actually has been on the Net speaking for the Net," he said.
Sen. Conrad Burns, also a co-chairman, warned that, despite the caucus, legislation will always trail developments in the private sector.
"If you as legislators don't understand technology today, you become overwhelmed by it," he said. Vice President Al Gore, an early booster of the Net who helped form the caucus, made a brief appearance. "I know the things that we're about to do in the next Congress won't be easy, but they're vital if we're going to manage the economic and technical opportunities of the Internet," he said.
Lawmakers have taken up a handful of Internet-related issues in the past session and will have more when the 105th Congress convenes in January.
Legislators passed the Communications Decency Act, opposed by online companies and civil libertarians as an infringement on free speech rights, but also defeated measures that would have imposed liability on Internet providers for copyright infringement.
This year, Congress is working on measures to set taxation rates for online sales, protect the privacy of consumer information and require background checks for Internet gun sales. Legislators must also weigh in on issues surrounding encryption -- the scrambling of words and images into code to protect privacy. The Clinton administration would like companies to build in access for law enforcement while cyberspace providers fear greater government control over the flow of material.
Jack Valenti, president of the Motion Picture Association of America, told the group of lawmakers that they must create laws to protect the intellectual property of filmmakers.
"Congress cannot avoid that all intellectual property has to be protected -- this can't be Dodge City without a sheriff," Valenti said. But he also praised the Internet as "the most valuable and spacious information greenhouse that's ever been built."
PSINet's Schrader countered that existing laws already protected movies, books and other works. "Everything is not new," he said. "It's the same-old, same-old."