Several U.S. legislators are planning to introduce measures soon to relax export restrictions on encryption technology, an increasingly essential part of global communications and online commerce.
The debate is part of the continuing clashes between consumers and businesses demanding more secure communications, on one side, and an anxiety by law enforcement to maintain access to encrypted messages, on the other. Encryption scrambles messages, making them unreadable except to those who possess the proper key. The current restrictions, imposed in the early 1990s, only allow companies to export products with relatively weak 64-bit encryption, thwarting them from taking advantage of the stronger 128-bit encryption favored by most foreign nations.  Last year, President Clinton dramatically relaxed restrictions on the export of encryption but maintained a "dual use" system, which essentially requires companies to jump through some export hoops when they send products abroad using encryption.
But the new regulations still place severe limits on most encryption technology and the export of software with encryption features over the Internet.
Rep Bob Goodlatte, a Virginia Republican, intends to reintroduce a bill this month to further ease those limitations.  The administration relaxing export controls "did not accomplish the complete lift" that industry wanted, said Goodlatte's Communications Director Jessica Milner.  His bill is the "most complete lift you can get," she said.
"We feel that the Clinton administration's solution was a half measure," staff person Eric Mueller said. "The goal of the bill is to ensure that American users have the strongest encryption available and that American businesses have the ability to compete in the global marketplace without being hampered by outmoded restraining laws."
In a parallel effort, Sen. Conrad Burns, Republican of Montana, is reportedly close to introducing a bill, largely opposed by the administration, that would lift restrictions on the export of products for all but a handful of countries, including Iran, Iraq, Syria, Libya and Cuba.
Burns staffers said Tuesday night that he would introduce the bill soon, but they were still unable to provide the made of supporters he had secured.
The bill, which got much more support than expected last year but was not acted on, aims to reconcile two competing concerns - the security of free citizens and the security needs of governments. It would allow companies to export technology domestically with strong encryption capabilities.  But companies would have to have the ability to decode, or decrypt, customer data for governments with proper orders. That requirement has caused suspicion in the computer industry that their products would be open to backdoor police access - something the bill expressly seeks to prevent.
"The door is still open," burns said at the gathering of several dozen Internet executives, lobbyists and press people. "We're not going to throw up the hands and walk away."
PRO-CODE would allow companies to export encryption technology with keys up to 64-bits in length. Current laws only allow 40-bit encryption.
Goodlatte's bill would:  remove export bans on encryption products, allowing U.S. companies to freely export most products. require the National Institute of Standards and Technology to develop a flexible algorithm, or basic set of programming instructions, to be used for encryption. allow computer companies to incorporate their own algorithms, such as those used by Netscape. exempt most Internet-based companies from any reporting requirements to the government about sales of encryption products. allow software companies to share protected encryption source code with foreign subsidiaries.
The administration had hoped to get compression technologies, like MPEG, or Moving Pictures Experts Group, covered by legislation. But no legislation on that issue is expected to be introduced this year, staff people said.
Rep Anna Eshoo, Democrat of California, and Rep Zoe Lofgren, Democrat of California, are both considering introducing bills, aides said.  It was unclear what the bills would propose.
The Legislation could be bogged down in House or Senate committees, but co-sponsors said they are optimistic that one of the proposals will make it to the floor for a vote. "This is something a lot of members of Congress support," White said.
--   Sangwon Yoon
((--202-898-8312))