Internet access providers and others who met with Net-savvy lawmakers said they fear Congress will wreak havoc on cyberspace but are also heartened by the growing number of legislators who understand the global computer network.
Lawmakers heard the mixed message last week in a meeting of the Congressional Internet Caucus, a bipartisan group of more than 80 members working to shape a legislative agenda for the 1996 session.
"I think it's inevitable that there will be bills introduced that attempt to legislate the content of everything on the Internet," Tom Evslin, vice president of AT&amp;T Corp.'s WorldNet Internet service, said after the meeting.
Evslin urged the legislators to foster an environment that allows the Net to develop and spread unhindered by regulation.
PSINet Inc. President William Schrader voiced fears that a drive by companies like AT&amp;T to control the Internet by creating industry-backed standards could trfield democratically-developed rules. "It is very important that these standards aren't private netiquette but Internet standards," he said, urging industry groups to include outside views in setting protocol.
But they said they were the most heartened by the growing number of legislators who seemed to grasp the intricacies of the Internet's technical workings and the implications of both the public- and private-sector implications. The caucus, formed in 1995, was up to 85 members,from just a few dozen at the start, its co-chairmen said.
Co-chairman of the caucus Sen. Robert Torricelli said he and other legislators are working on bills to protect encryption technology and surfing privacy, and to set up an international commission to match U.S. law with other nations' rules.
A
Representative Ron Wyden, said laws should reflect the rapid change of the Internet.
"When change comes, it will come from the marketplace," he said. "I assure you, technology will outstrip us every single day."
Last year was a mixed bag for the Internet in Congress.
Legislators passed the Communications Decency Act, opposed by online companies and civil libertarians as an infringement on free speech rights, but also defeated measures that would have imposed liability on Internet providers for copyright infringement.
Sun Microsystems Inc.'s chief scientist, John Gage, fretted that, with only 85 pro-Internet legislators out of 435 in the House and 100 in the Senate, most in Congress remained ignorant of the Net. "We've got a long way to go," he said.
Companies interested in the Internet offered some conflicting goals for Congress. Jack Valenti, president of the Motion Picture Association of America, urged the legislators to impose new laws protecting Hollywood products.
"We must correct the legal infrastructure," Valenti said.
PSINet's Schrader countered that existing laws already protected movies, books and other works. "Everything is not new," he said. "It's the same-old, same-old."