A scuffle breaking out between a top U.S. bank regulator and the state of Rhode Island could foreshadow an increasing number of disputes as more national banks begin selling insurance products, market participants said.
The Comptroller of the Currency last Wednesday indicated it may preempt and override a Rhode Island law that bankers say discriminates against them in favor of other insurance sellers. The Rhode Island measure, which takes effect April 1, requires companies selling insurance to register with the state, pay a fee and adhere to certain training and consumer disclosure rules. But it also requires that bank personnel involved exclusively in banking activities, such as loan origination, must not sell insurance. Insurance sold by banks must be separate from any banking activities, the measure said.  The Comptroller's Office said that the Rhode Island law may interfere with national banks' ability to offer insurance products. It asked for public comment and can pre-empt the state law if it is found to be unduly burdensome.
Bank trade groups and the Independent Insurance Agents of America-which represents more than 200,000 independent insurance agents-each sent the Comptroller's office letters this week asking for either an override or a green light for the law.
But last year, the Supreme Court rejected discriminatory state insurance laws and ruled that states cannot "significantly interfere" with national banks conducting permissible activities.
Banks said that states are now trying to evade the court's ruling. They charged that an insurance agents trade group is pushing states to adopt laws like the Rhode Island measure.
The Comptroller's Office sought comment from the public on whether it should preempt the Rhode Island law. The American Bankers Association, the Independent Community Bankers of America, and several other organizations wrote to the office, urging an override.  The industry groups said a limited preemptin is appropriate because the Rhode Island law discriminates against national banks.  "The legislation clearly has the effect of preventing national banks from competing in Rhode Island on a levelplayig field with insurance agents," said Robert D. McIntyre, a senior vice president at the American Bankers Association.
The dispute is likely to spread as other states grapple with how to enact the Supreme Court's decision and how to prevent national banks from sidestepping state licensing and other restrictions, bankers said.
The Comptroller's Office began to investigate the Rhode Island law after getting letters of complaint from banks and agents. A group of Rhode Island banks questioned the constitutionality of the law, which came after a bitter legislative fight and opposition from the Independent Insurance Agents of America.
The OCC's stance was cheered by bankers, but the move was contested by insurance agents, who have fought banks' efforts to expand their insurance businesses. The Independent Agents of Rhode Island argued that the state legislature had acted within its authority and that states have the right to regulate activities in the best interest of its citizens.
The group said the law was crafted to prevent the wrong kind of aggression in insurance sales, and protect consumers. The law contains numerous provisions designed to prevent banks from marketing insurance on an overly aggressive basis, and required greater disclosure of discounts that banks offer consumers.
Banks said the law on its face is more burdensome to banks than to others selling insurance.
For example, bank personnel involved in teller activities or making loans would be restricted from selling insurance, forcing banks to have two different sales forces, McIntyre said.
The Comptroller's Office is reviewing the comments it received and will issue an opinion, but has not set a deadline for making a decision, a spokesman said.