Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan on Friday urged Congress to modernise U.S. financial laws but warned that some government oversight must be maintained to avert financial catastrophes.
In a speech to a congressional joint committee examining amendments to federal financial laws, Greenspan likened the development of new financial products and markets to the birth of nuclear power, which sparked a "craze of nuclear optimism" as energy experts sought to solve global energy needs.  "Years later, the emphasis shifted," he said. "The realization that the chain reaction of nuclear fission, while a source of enormous potential for good, also carried with it sever risks and possible catastrophe." That is analogous to the current state of financial markets, he said. "As the dynamic growth and competitive environment in the complex of financial markets continue, sometimes beyond our understanding, the potential for enhanced economic efficiency is enormous," he said. "But let us not forget that the stability of marketplace operations remains equally important. There can be no doubt that systemic risks will continue to accompany many of the activities occurring in mature markets for some time to come."
"The challenge of modern financial regulation is to modernise the regulatory system without compromising the safety and soundness of the system," Greenspan said.  Greenspan warned, however, that while "for the vast majority of firms, competition has provided an adequate shield against serious losses," not all financial disasters can be prevented. To guard against such disasters, he said, required "a concerted effort by the entire financial system to contain those relatively few losses that can become systemic."  Greenspan likened the role of financial regulators to the containment of a nuclear reaction. "In a financial system, the containment barrier is the set of regulations that have evolved over the years."
"It is important to remember that the impetus to contain this kind of risk is not sought in the pursuit of some utopian concept of markets devoid of all government oversight," Greenspan said. "The task of regulations is to minimize the probability of systemic problems and, should they arise, to contain them to an extent that spillovers to the general economy are minimized or avoided," he said.  Greenspan, who has repeatedly emphasized the need for Congress to modernise financial laws, used a nuclear physics analogy to describe the challenge of avoiding catastrophic economic markets. "That cataclysmic interaction, which can be compared to the chain reaction of nuclear physics, has been the preferred method of warfare of the twentieth century and can be the entrance to economic failure," he said.
Using its existing authority to oversee banks and provide loans, the Federal Reserve has been able to contain previous crises, Greenspan said. "There have been occasions when we have been on the edge of a significant breakout," he said, but declined to name the institutions involved.
Since then, financial services have become much more complex, with many products now being traded beyond the reach of traditional regulators. Congressionally mandated reviews of financial services laws happen every few years, but Greenspan said that markets can move faster than lawmakers can act.
Greenspan likened the Federal Reserve's action to stopping a cascade of nuclear reactions. "It's sort of like dropping a Dixie Cup on Chernobyl," he joked. The Soviet nuclear power plant suffered from a catastrophic meltdown in 1986, one of the world's worst radioactive disasters ever.
Greenspan said it was "imperative" for Congress to examine the current laws to make sure that records of past experiences are incorporated into the existing regulations.
Greenspan said it is important for Congress to modernise U.S. financial laws "so that we do not become outdated and, again, to make certain that we are not stifling emerging markets." Congress needs to adjust the powers it has delegated to the central bank and other federal agencies, he added.
For example, in a recent review of Regulation Y, governing non-bank interests of bank holding companies, the Fed found that "some of that stuff is just unbelievable because the markets have changed so much," the Fed chairman said, without elaborating.
If Congress alters the Fed's responsibilities, it should not strip the central bank of its ability to contain systemic risk, Greenspan argued. "Having seen the inner workings of these things, a lot of the things we do actually are quite effective," he said.
"I would be very chagrined to see some of these powers disappear ... I say that from someone who believes the less you interfere in the market, the better."
Under one proposal before Congress, the Federal Reserve would remain a primary regulator of financial institutions such as banks. But under other proposals, that authority could be divided among many regulators or entrusted to a new committee of federal regulators.
The Fed chief said he believed industry self-regulation, such as self-imposed restrictions on derivatives trading, could work "in almost every case."
Greenspan Warns Against Too Much Regulation  Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan warned against excessive regulations on some forms of derivatives trading by sophisticated institutional investors.  In a speech at a Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta conference, Greenspan warned that tight regulations on the trading of derivatives, financial instruments whose value is based on the value of something else such as a commodity, stock or currency price, could interfere with the efficient workings of financial markets.
The dispute had prompted several lawmakers to propose bills aimed at clarifying the relationship between the agencies. "The tension between the Treasury Department, which is an integrative regulator—they take this big view of the industry and how it runs in total—and the CFTC is understandable," Greenspan said.
Greenspan dismissed efforts by the CFTC to oversee such instruments as unnecessary. "This is a faculty which pre-existed the 1974 act," he said. "Almost all of the true derivatives markets have nothing to do with the futures markets."
Even trading by less-sophisticated retail investors "is more appropriately regulated" by bank regulators and the Securities and Exchange Commission, not the CFTC, he said.
Greenspan's comments are likely to be widely seen as a show of support for the Treasury Department's stance on the issue and will likely be interpreted as a green light for those who support fewer -- or no -- constraints on the growth of derivatives trading.
The chairman's statements clearly showed his intent to "let the CFTC concentrate on agricultural commodities and leave the rest of the OTC issues to the SEC and the banking regulators," said John Frawley, an executive with the Investment Company Institute, a trade association based in Washington D.C.
"So if you're looking for a Good Housekeeping seal of approval, he just sort of stamped it on those who are looking for such a thing," Frawley told reporters at a briefing.