The Supreme Court said Monday it would decide whether a federal regulator had properly allowed credit unions to expand their membership over the past 15 years, settling a long-running legal dispute between the cooperative non-profits and banks.
The lawsuit, which pits banks against credit unions, is being followed closely in the banking industry and by consumer groups, which argue that credit unions provide lower-cost services than do banks.  At issue is whether the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA), which regulates federal credit unions, had the authority to allow credit unions to join together members from distinct groups into "multi-group" unions.  Banks have argued that the law Congress originally passed creating credit unions only allowed a single group of people to band together in a credit union. To permit multi-group credit unions was to let them compete unfairly in the banking industry, the banks stated.  But in its appeal to the Supreme Court, the Justice Department argued that multi-group credit unions actually encourage competition among banks by providing a banking alternative for those not easily served by banks.
The 1934 Federal Credit Union Act creating credit unions "was not meant to delineate and protect bank markets at the expense of the consumer," said Marc Schaefer, president of AT&amp;T Family Federal Credit Union, the credit union being sued by banks in the case.
"The credit union movement was established to provide people with the opportunity to save and borrow money at the most reasonable terms," Schaefer said. "This case is all about choice."
But Johnny Johnson, executive director of the Independent Bankers Association of America, which brought the lawsuit, said the ruling was unnecessary because all the court had to do was enforce existing law.
"We are disappointed at the prospect of delay in the enfocement of a law we believe is quite clear," he said.
The decision to consider the case comes as credit unions have been gaining market share at the expense of banks. Credit unions increased their assets by $4.3 billion to $141 billion in 1998, while banks saw their assets decline by $3.9 billion to $1.78 trillion, according to the Credit Union National Association.
The Clinton administration also sought review by the high court. In a brief for the Department of Justice, solicitor general Walter Dellinger said the policy change had "achieved its aim of promoting the federal financial interest in promoting economic diversity and stabilisation of the credit union industry."
The appeals court ruling in favour of the banks "threatens nationwide instability and losses in the credit union industry affecting millions of persons," Dellinger said.
Credit unions are non-profit organisations similar to mutual savings banks. Congress set up the credit unions in 1934 to provide banking services to financially strapped members of marginalised groups, such as miners or railroad workers. Originally, only members of the same group could join any given credit union.
In 1982, the National Credit Union Administration, which regulates federally chartered credit unions, decided to allow the unions to encompass multiple occupational and geographical groups. This policy change allowed the unions to nearly quadruple in size from about 1 million members in 1982 to about 3.6 million members today.
Banks countered, unsuccessfully, that the Credit Union Act prohibited such changes. But the credit unions won the support of Congress, which twice passed legislation clarifying the law and allowing the expansion.
The U.S. District Court dismissed the suit on technical grounds, and the banks appealed, winning last July. The court ruled that credit unions had misinterpreted the 1934 law and could only accept members from one group.
Those limits have since been put on hold until the Supreme Court makes a decision. But if the banks win, their next move could be to ask the courts to force multi-group credit unions to throw out members from all but one group.
The credit unions, backed by the Justice Department, are hoping the Supreme Court sides with the policy change from 1982. They said it was authorized under the law and does not harm banks. They have argued that the congressional intent of the 1934 Credit Union Act was to promote mass-market financial services to consumers at the lowest possible cost.
"No court ruling or lobby effort will change the fact that credit unions are committed to providing lower cost financial products and services to American consumers," said Kenneth Robinson, president of the Credit Union National Association.
((202-898-8312))