The Commodity Futures Trading Commission, one of the nation's primary regulators of derivatives, has no authority over most foreign currency transactions, the Supreme Court said Tuesday.
In a unanimous decision, the court ruled that a 1974 law exempting some transactions in foreign currency from CFTC oversight also exempted some foreign exchange derivatives, financial instruments whose value is based on the value of currencies like the dollar or Japanese yen.
The ruling resulted from the CFTC's attempt to punish William Dunn, an investor accused of defrauding hundreds of customers.
But when Congress created the commission in 1974, it added an amendment permitting off-exchange trading in foreign currency and a few other items without CFTC regulation. The amendment was requested by the Treasury Department, which believed that the developing market in foreign currency among large banks and securities firms would be overregulated by CFTC oversight.
The foreign currency derivatives market, however, did not exist at the time, and the amendment did not specifically mention those instruments. The CFTC later did attempt to extend its authority over foreign exchange derivatives. These so-called foreign-exchange options, which offer their holders the rightbut not the obligationto buy or sell a particular currency at a certain future rate, evolved into a $50-billion-a-year global market. Also, while foreign currencies are not traded on exchanges, investors increasingly sought contracts with one another over the telephone or through electronic networks.
The case before the Supreme Court involved John Dunn, a CFTC target, who had been accused of trading foreign currency options. When someone buys an option, he or she has the right to purchase or sell a set amount of currency for a fixed rate at a fixed time in the future. This off-exchange transaction was not recognized or regulated by the CFTC, because the commission believed its jurisdiction extended only to futures contracts, not options. Dunn and the banks argued that options trading was covered by the original 1974 law.
The Supreme Court, however, said that the exemption covered foreign currency options, a judgement that could affect billions of dollars of trading in the foreign exchange market each day.
"We conclude that an option is an 'instrument commonly known as a 'futures contract,"' Justice Stephen Breyer wrote for the court, adding that the exemption applies to foreign exchange options because they are "clearly similar to, indeed indistinguishable from, futures contracts."
That pleased banks and Wall Street trade groups, which had sided with Dunn. They argued that subjecting their off-exchange foreign exchange trading to CFTC oversight would be too costly, forcing them to shut down U.S. operations and move overseas.
"It preserves the historical differentiation between the exchange markets and the over-the-counter markets," said Paul Raisler, a partner at Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver & Jacobson, which represented the Banks of New York.
"It supports our view that the amendment should be read broadly," Raisler, a former general counsel of the CFTC added.
Dunn's lawyer and the banks suggested that any wrongdoing in the foreign exchange area could be dealt with under existing law by other federal agencies, but the Supreme Court did not address the issue. Most off-exchange derivatives trading is not directly regulated, although most participants in such markets are overseen by bank, securities and insurance regulators.
The CFTC said that the decision had a limited impact, since most foreign currency options trading involves large banks and other sophisticated investors who, the commission argued, should know the risks.
The CFTC had maintained that foreign currency is a commodity under its jurisdiction, and that foreign currency options trading should therefore be subject to CFTC oversight. The agency also argued that leaving such options unregulated could lead to fraud, as in the case of Dunn.
The CFTC did not appeal the lower court's decision. Tuesday's ruling was limited to interpreting the wording of the amendment and did not address the policy issue of whether foreign currency derivatives should be subject to CFTC regulation.
"While we are disappointed in the outcome of the case, we note that the Supreme Court's opinion was limited to the narrow issue of whether the Treasury amendment treats futures and options the same," CFTC general counsel Dan Waldman said. "The court's decision does not affect the commission's ongoing efforts to police fraud against the public in foreign currency trading."
Congress is already discussing amending the 1974 Treasury amendment. The Supreme Court's decision "underlines the need for Congress to make decisions about what financial products should or should not be subject to the CFTC's jurisdiction," said Andy Fisher, spokesman for the Senate Agriculture Committee.
Sens. Dick Lugar, R-Ind., Pat Leahy, D-Vt., and Tom Harkin, D-Iowa, introduced a Senate bill to overhaul futures regulation. "It makes the case to proceed with that bill as quickly as we can," Fisher said.
The court invited congressional action. Recognising an "important public policy dispute" underlying the case, the court suggested "these arguments are addressed to the Congress, not the courts."