Former President Bill Clinton's team of advisers has called for a "free market" approach to the internet economy, urging lawmakers to take a hands-off approach to regulation of the industry.
The report, released by Clinton's The Global Initiative on Thursday, says governments should promote competition and open access to the internet, instead of enacting restrictive regulations that could impede innovation and stifle economic growth.
The report was crafted in part by a team of prominent tech leaders, including Google Executive Chairman Eric Schmidt and venture capitalist John Doerr, both of whom advised the former president on technology issues during his time in office.
Schmidt and other advisers to Clinton, who served as president from 1993 to 2001, argue that the internet is too important to be weighed down by regulations that could limit its potential.
"Governments need to approach the internet with a light touch, allowing innovation to flourish and competition to drive prices down and quality up," the report said.
The report also praised the Obama administration's decision to transition control of the internet's domain name system to a global non-profit organization, saying it would "enhance competition and innovation, while promoting global commerce and free expression."
The report comes at a time when governments around the world are grappling with how to regulate the fast-growing internet economy, which is worth an estimated $4 trillion globally.
In recent months, the European Commission has been investigating Google over allegations that it promoted its own services at the expense of rivals in search results. In the United States, the Federal Communications Commission recently passed a controversial set of net neutrality rules that prevent internet service providers from offering favored treatment to certain websites and services.
But Clinton's advisers argue that such approaches will do more harm than good.
"The internet is the most powerful engine of growth and opportunity we have seen in decades," the report said. "But if governments fail to recognize the benefits of free market policies, we risk stifling innovation and undermining future growth."
The report also urged companies to adopt more diverse hiring practices to increase the number of women and minorities in tech.
"The internet economy is booming, but it's not benefitting everyone equally," said Laura Tyson, a member of Clinton's team and a professor at the Haas School of Business at the University of California, Berkeley. "Companies need to do more to bring more women and underrepresented minorities into their ranks, and to ensure that they have access to the same opportunities for advancement as their white, male colleagues."
The report is the latest in a series of studies and reports that have called for a more flexible, market-oriented approach to internet policy. Last year, a paper written by economist Robert Shapiro argued that the internet economy could generate $10 trillion in additional output and create 22 million new jobs by 2020 if governments adopt more market-friendly policies.
It's unclear if Clinton himself will embrace the report or its conclusions. The former president has not been actively involved in policy discussions since leaving office, and has largely stayed out of the tech debate.
But his advisers hope that the report will spur a renewed conversation about the importance of the internet to the global economy, and the need to preserve its open and innovative nature.
"The internet has transformed the way we do business, communicate, and live our lives," the report said. "It's up to us to ensure that it remains a space of innovation and entrepreneurship, where anyone with a good idea and a dream can succeed."