When a company in California sells a book to a consumer in Canada from a Web site hosted on a computer in England, what laws govern the transaction?
The laws that govern the transaction depend on a number of factors, including where the company is located, where the consumer is located, and what type of transaction is taking place. In the case of the company in California selling a book to a consumer in Canada from a web site hosted in England, the laws would be a combination of international laws, state laws (in California and Canada), and federal laws. For example, the transaction may be subject to different tax laws, different laws regarding trade and commerce, and different laws regarding consumer protection. Additionally, the transaction may involve the laws of the country where the web site is hosted, such as laws regarding intellectual property rights, privacy, or fraud.
Governments are grappling with the question of who is responsible for regulating e-commerce, with some groups arguing that federal law should be enacted to preempt existing or proposed laws on the local level.
The answer to the question is that it depends on many things.  It depends on the laws of California, Canada, and England, as well as any applicable federal laws.  It will also depend on the laws of any other jurisdictions that may be applicable.  Additionally, the terms of the contract between the seller and the buyer will also be relevant.  If the terms specify that the laws of a particular jurisdiction or country are applicable, then those laws will take precedence.
This situation will grow more complicated as worldwide electronic commerce takes off.  International electronic commerce has been particularly difficult to regulate, as legal systems from country to country differ. The United States can create laws applicable domestically, but companies in foreign countries can often ignore them with impunity.  The U.S. Congress plans to introduce a bill at the end of November that expresses its willingness to cooperate with other countries in investigating Internet fraud or crimes.  However, there are areas where the federal government is trying to take the lead.
"The federal government should not jerk the reins on the Internet," said Jeff Richards, a partner at law firm Heller, Ehrman White & McAuliffe in San Francisco, which markets a wide range of legal services for online companies. "But it could set guidelines and provide [state] governments with leeway to [develop] new laws on a case-by-case basis." Nevertheless, some rules are slowing emerging. Earlier this month, President Clinton signed the Telecommunications Act, which restricts online access to minors, streamlines cellular phone industry regulation and helps fund schools' Internet connections. The law outweighs the much debated Communications Decency Act, which was struck down as unconstitutional last summer.  Administrative bodies at the federal and state level have cracked down on certain activities they deem illegal. The Federal Trade Commission has ordered six online marketers to immediately halt a scheme in which "spammers" sneaked advertising onto an unsuspecting user's Web site. Four states have sued online cigarette retailers for disregarding a 1992 law that prohibits shipments of cigarettes and smokeless tobacco items through the mail.
Almost one-third of all complaints to the Federal Trade Commission involve Internet activities, and the commission has held several days of hearings on consumer protection issues. Among them is the rising concern about privacy, an area with few protective laws.
"We need to define what is an acceptable standard of behavior with respect to private data and how that data can be incorporated into the online sales model," said George Lastosiello, a senior analyst at Forrester Research. The European Union has pioneered standards that prohibit companies from collecting or distributing private information without consumers' permission. The United States is currently debating a set of similar rules proposed at the federal level and some states have already taken action.
For example, in October, a Silicon Valley company called Toysmart.com was criticized for offering to sell its customer lists along with its assets, even though its privacy statement had prohibited such purchases. The offering by lenders trying to recoup investment in the failed toy Web site included names, addresses, the ages of the customers' children and even mothers' maiden names.
It later emerged that Lexis-Nexis had not released the data to the public, but the damage to the company's reputation was done.
The restrictions sought by Congress and other governments here and abroad, could hamper growth of the industry, some experts warn. "We all understand the value of broader consumer protection but we don't want it to come at the expense of our ability to reach new markets," said Wendy Melillo, vice president of business affairs at News2U, an Internet broadcast firm. "We don't want legislation to inhibit our ability to expand their products." The industry is working with Congress to prevent any laws that would unduly restrict online commerce. "We are trying to work out a rational, self-regulatory scheme rather than put something into law," said Mike Godwin, staff counsel for the Electronic Frontier Foundation. "We don't want to have the Congress set up another big, unwieldy bureaucracy to just rubber-stamp what the marketplace is doing." Longstanding labor laws also govern the hiring of independent contractors or outsourced workers. As online firms contract out more work, they should make sure they avoid potential legal problems with unpaid overtime or minimum-wage regulations, said David C. Vladeck, a Washington attorney and professor at the Georgetown University Law Center.
The FTC has also called for measures to ensure children using the 'Net don't come across pornography or offensive material, to prevent deception in online advertising and to clarify which laws apply when buying and selling over the Net. More specific solutions, however, have been scarce. The National Association of Securities Dealers launched a project to research Internet securities trading, but there are no hard and fast rules regarding how day traders using the 'Net should behave.
The Treasury Department has been debating policies for electronic money, funds held on electronic cards. With millions of dollars in investments and major companies like Citibank and Visa testing such products, the department in June issued a report outlining the need for regulation. The report suggested that the administration might need to craft rules governing encryption and authentication of digital funds.
And the Federal Reserve, which has oversight of national banks, is also grappling over the "electronic cash" products issued by private companies. Electronic cash works like a credit card but is stored on a computer instead. The Fed has tested the products to see if they can be used to move money easily across international borders.
"Heavyhanded, pre-emptive attempts to regulate these products before any social risks have been demonstrated would handicap innovation," Federal Reserve Gov. Edward Kelley said earlier this month.
The Securities and Exchange Commission, which regulates the largest and most important online sales, has taken a cautious approach. Despite reports of fraud on emerging markets for online securities, the SEC has stuck with the traditional rules.
"It's not an area where we need new laws or new authority," John Stark, special counsel of Internet projects at the SEC said. "It's the same swindles, just in a different medium."