U.S. laws governing the trillion dollar futures markets could be rocked by the Supreme Court's interpretation of the word "in" in a case to be argued Wednesday. But a legislative solution is in the offing.
The case involves the definition of the word "in" in the so-called "Treasury Amendment" to the Commodity Exchange Act. The contested six-word phrase exempts from regulation's grasp "transactions in" certain types of contracts.
The case, Dunn v. CFTC, is the latest dispute over whether the law should apply to forex trading, a market estimated to be worth more than $1 trillion a day and which was traditionally handled by banks.
The case pits five major banks, including Citibank N.A. and Bankers Trust Co. against the Chicago Board of Trade and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. At stake is the status of the $40 billion a day foreign exchange market, but also the futures markets as a whole.
Keeping the Peace The debate began peacefully enough in 1973. Early in the year, Bankers Trust and several other big banks asked the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, which enforces the Commodity Exchange Act, to exempt a growing array of payments and investment vehicles offered at the time.
They argued that trading in foreign currency, for instance, should be exempt from the Commodities Exchange Act since foreign currencies are not commodities and, since the currency markets operated under banking regulations, extra CFTC oversight was unnecessary.
The Treasury Department agreed and in a letter to Congress suggested an amendment to the law that became known as the Treasury Amendment.
The amendment exempted transactions from CFTC oversight if they involved foreign currencies and trading was done "principally with persons who are not eligible contract participants." The Treasury Amendment became the pivotal question in a legal dispute that has dragged on for more than a decade.
The amendment does not define what a "board of trade" is but in subsequent years the CFTC and courts concluded that it will usually refer to futures exchanges, like the Chicago Board of Trade and Chicago Mercantile Exchange. The Treasury Amendment quieted protests from the large banks but soon after, smaller banks, financial firms and investment companies began entering the forex markets. The CFTC then warned the traders they were violating the Commodity Exchange Act and had to register sn exchanges or face prosecution.
The CFTC began to use its authority to go after the bucket shops and conclude the buckethops were not exempt under the Treasury Amendment. It asserted that the exemption was limited to trades "in" foreign currency -- not on futures or options based on foreign currency.
The CFTC wanted to bring forex shops under the umbrella of the Commodity Exchange Act, but couldn't until the courts established that the ways they sold contracts were transactions "in" foreign currencies rather than "involving" them.
The question landed before the Supreme Court in the case of Michael Dunn, founder of the Gibraltar Financial Corp. In 1989, Dunn began pooling funds to invest in forex options. Payment of more than $230 million to investors promised returns of 15 to 25 percent, plus an extra performance fee for Dunn.
Dunn was charged with trading off-exchange foreign currency futures contracts in 1998 but a federal court in New York agreed with the bucket shop logic and exempted Dunn from regulation under the commodity act.
Asking the Supreme Court to uphold that decision, CFTC lawyers argue that Congress would have used the word "involving" rather than "in" if it had wanted to exempt forex derivatives.
The big banks that argued for a broad interpretation of the amendment took issue with the CFTC's formulation. They argued "in" exemptions all transactions that can be characterized from a broad, fair and liberal perspective as touching in any way on a currency.
"Transactions in foreign currency are exempt from CFTC jurisdiction," argued Richard Cooper, an attorney for one of Dunn's funds. He argued that a plain reading of the Treasury Amendment exempted all transactions, not just those involving actual foreign currency. Banks, utilities and energy companies -- all of which engage in foreign currency and other transactions covered by the amendment -- agree with Cooper's interpretation. "We talk to many people in the industry and it is our understanding that the implications of the case could extend much further," said Lynelee Brown, a lawyer with Heller Financial, a Chicago-based lender. "It could affect companies in the energy industry and all those firms that issue government securities." Bankers and energy companies, in briefs to the Supreme Court, said that ruling in favor of the CFTC would force them to move much of their operations overseas to avoid CFTC regulation.
This statement, legal authorities said, invokes the "in" question.
"This one bothers us more than most," said attorney Richard Schaeffer, general counsel for the Chicago Mercantile Exchange. He argued that if all currency trading is exempt from the Commodity Exchange Act, then traders would have no incentive to use the exchange's regulated transparent markets. They could instead buy and sell contracts with no oversight from the CFTC.
"The idea that someone could clone the Board of Trade's principal products, trade them off-exchange and not be subject to any regulation is pretty darn troublesome," Mark Young, another exchange attorney, said.
But several lawyers said any legislation would have to strike a balance if it is to satisfy all sides. It should ensure bank customers are protected but allow the banks to continue trading forex derivatives, thereby encouraging more investment in the U.S., traders said.
For More Information:  Brian Francis  Briggs and Associates
-- 202-898-8312