The United States Commerce Department has issued final export rules that would require firms to get licenses to sell certain computer encoding products to other countries. The move has come despite criticism from the industry, which claims the regulations would harm both businesses and customers.
The Department claims the new rules are targeted at specific products that can be used in surveillance, intelligence gathering, and other security-related activities. Officials argue that the export of these products should be tightly controlled in order to prevent them from ending up in the hands of malicious actors who could use them to harm national security and U.S. economic interests.
Encryption products are essential tools for protecting consumer data, improving security, and facilitating commerce around the world. The new rule is intended to ensure they are not misused by foreign governments or malicious actors. It will require companies to acquire a license before exporting items that contain certain types of encryption technology. These include encryption products that have been modified to reduce their security thresholds; products with relatively weak encryption standards; and products whose primary purpose is to obscure data trails. Companies would also be required to obtain licenses for mass market products targeting foreign customers.
The new rule has been widely criticized by the tech industry, which argues that it will create a costly and confusing system of export controls, with companies needing to apply for licenses on a case-by-case basis. This arcane process could be prohibitively complicated for small businesses, argues an industry proposal submitted to the Commerce Department earlier this year.
The U.S. Chamber of Commerce, a business advocacy group, has argued that the rule would impose additional compliance costs on firms without providing significant security benefits. "It is difficult to be optimistic about a regulatory regime that attempts to shoehorn industry into a box and fails to acknowledge the reality of today’s technology market and user needs," the Chamber said in a statement.
Privacy groups have also voiced concern, arguing that the rule would undermine user privacy and security. "Strong encryption is an essential tool for protecting sensitive information, financial transactions, and online communications," said Gennie Gebhart, associate director of research at the Electronic Frontier Foundation, a nonprofit group that advocates for digital rights. "This rule will harm users and businesses alike by weakening trust in online platforms and services."
In response to industry and civil society concerns, the Department launched an extended comment period to allow more time to review and comment on the proposed rule. The Department received over 8,000 comments, many of which expressed concerns at the potential impact on businesses and user privacy.
The rule has also been modified in response to feedback. The Commerce Department made a number of changes to the draft rule that was published earlier this year, including clarifying the definition of "mass market" products, providing additional guidance on license applications, and allowing certain products to be exported without a license.
The Department acknowledged that the new rule would not eliminate all the concerns raised by industry and privacy groups, but said it was necessary to address the evolving threats to national security and commerce. "We understand that some in industry and civil society disagree with certain provisions in the rule," the Department said. "However, these concerns do not outweigh the need to protect our national security and economic competitiveness from the risks posed by uncontrolled exports of encryption products."
The final rule has been published in the Federal Register, and is set to take effect on March 6, 2021. Businesses that export encryption products are advised to review the rule carefully and seek legal advice if necessary.