Supreme Court justices Wednesday sharply questioned rules governing so-called derivative investments and foreign currency trading in a case that could have wide repercussions for both markets.
At issue is the dual system of regulations used for policing the commodities and futures markets: the oversight of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) for the retail investor and the exemptions to that oversight for institutional players.
That distinction has been blurred in recent years, as defendants accused of fraud by the CFTC have sought to rely on an exemption from regulation, relied on by the bigger players, in a 1974 amendment to the Commodity Exchange Act.
The amendment was added at the request of the Treasury Department to ensure that sophisticated investors trading in foreign currency and a few other markets would not be subject to uneccessary regulation by the CFTC.
Lower courts have made conflicting rulings about the 1974 amendment and the Supreme Court decided last year to hear the case of William Dunn, a foreign currency investment advisor charged with fraud by the CFTC after losing $95 million of his clients' money.
Jeffrey Minear, assistant to the Solicitor General -- the federal government's representative before the Supreme Court -- defended the CFTC's prosecution of Dunn before the court Wednesday. Minear argued that the 1974 exemption for "transactions in foreign currency" did not cover Dunn's trading in foreign currency options, one type of derivative. A derivative is an investment whose value is derived from a stock, bond, currency, commodity or other instrument.
"That limitation was down on foreign currency and not transactions in foreign currency derivatives," Minear argued.
Congress was "not using consistent language" in the commodity laws passed in 1974 and since then, Justice Antonin Scalia said. "They use in, they use on, they use involving."
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist asked whether the phrase "transactions in foreign currency" meant the same now as it did in 1922, the year the Commodities Exchange Act was originally passed.
"Perhaps it was true in 1922 but that doesn't prove it's true now," the chief justice interjected.
Minear also did not win over at least one of his more liberal colleagues. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg described as "a problem we face in the regulatory world" trying to determine when an investment was previously exempt from regulation but has become subject to regulation due to changes in the marketplace.
Several Wall Street trade groups and big banks filed friend-of-the-court briefs in support of Dunn's position. They warned that if the court upheld the CFTC's position, the burden of additional regulation might drive the gigantic $40 billion a day foreign exchange market in the United States might overseas.
The court's decision, along with proposals in Congress to change the 1974 amendment, will have a dramatic impact on the way derivatives and foreign exchange investments are regulated in the United States, securities lawyers said. "This case is really riding the crest of a wave, to use a cliche," said Ephraim Garnett, a Washington lawyer representing several Wall Street groups in the case. "Both houses of Congress are looking into the entire issue of futures and derivatives trading."
The case has also drawn the attention of the Group of Seven industrialized nations, which recently proposed international standards for oversight of foreign currency markets.
A decision is not expected for at least a few months. Several members of Congress have said they may introduce legislation early next year to change the 1974 amendment, possibly rendering the verdict in the Dunn case moot.