The Internet continued to grow in leaps and bounds this year while online services found it much harder to add new customers, a survey said Friday.
The Harris Poll showed 59 percent of American adults used computers in September, up from 56 percent in January. At the same time, 48 percent of adults followed the trend and had accessed the Internet at least once, compared with 45 percent in January. The poll also showed that more businesses were connected to the Internet, with 41 percent of the nation's households with incomes of $50,000 or more using it. That compared with 36 percent in January.
"Even allowing for the fact that some people undoubtedly answered 'yes' when they should have answered 'no.' the number of people with Internet access grew by almost a third this year," Harris said.
Internet access providers, such as America Online Inc. and the Microsoft MSN service, added subscribers this year, but the rate of growth is declining as the customer base grows larger.  AOL, by far the biggest online provider, had 11.1 million subscribers at the end of the third quarter, right in line with the 11 million it had at the end of the second quarter but up sharply from nine million in 1998.
Online services, which provide private online content in addition to Internet access, have faced greater competition this year from companies like AT&amp;T Corp., which provide cheaper Internet-only access.
The poll also found that 3.6 million adults said they had used the World Wide Web -an Internet service that provides multimedia content like graphics, audio and video - up from 1.8 million adults at the beginning of the year.
The Harris survey said the lion's share of Internet users, some 23 million, accessed the Internet directly through online services. Some nine million used commercial Internet service providers such as AT&amp;T, while two million accessed the Internet through place of employment, the survey reported. Americans were spending slightly less time online than six months ago, according to the poll.
Users of personal computers and Internet browsers spent an average of 7-1/2 hours a month this September, compared to 8-3/4 hours last January, the poll said.
The biggest users of computer services are young adults, ages 18-29, the poll found. Sixty-five percent of those surveyed in that age group admitted to using either a computer or the Internet, up from 57 percent in January.
Among adults with college degrees, 71 percent said they used computers at home or at work, while only 24 percent of adults with no high school diploma or equivalent said they used computers. Internet usage was also heavily skewed towards wealthier, younger people. Among respondents with annual family incomes greater than US$75,000, 57 percent said they had used the Internet, while only 11 percent of those with family incomes of less than US$15,000 said they had used the Net. Among those under age 30, 45 percent said they had used the Internet while only nine percent of those 50 and older said they had.
The poll's results were based on a telephone survey of 1,032 adults at the end of September and have a margin of error of plus or minus 3 percentage points, according to Harris.