At the eve of the Versailles conference, promoters of the Polish cause immediately realised the international precariousness of their aims to forge the rebirth of an independent Polish state. Moving with caution, Pisudski, Head of State and Supreme Commander of the Polish troops, in December 1918 even went as far as addressing his archrival Dmowski of the Polish National Committee in Paris as 'My Dear Roman' in an attempt to reconcile the Polish feuding factions. From the outset, it appeared that Poland's independence 'would depend almost exclusively on the endeavours of the Poles themselves', however, soon after the official acknowledgement of Poland's Second Republic, the political struggle grew bitter. It was only the realisation of Soviet hostility toward their new western neighbour that forced the antagonistic political forces to work together in a somewhat efficient war cabinet, though even then with the greatest difficulty and resentment. At nearly the same time that peace was concluded with the Russians in the Treaty of Riga, the endeks, as Dmowski's National Democrats popularly came to be know, managed to pass an overly liberal constitution which left virtually no freedom to the president of the new Polish Republic and much procedural liberty with the endek-dominated parliament. It was immediately recognised as 'a monument to anti- Pisudskiism', and left Pisudski bereft of a meaningful role within Polish politics, despite his nationwide fame as Poland's liberator gained through his successful military operations against the Soviet troops in the war of 1919-21. The seed was thus planted for Pisudski's initial decision to overthrow the government in 1926 by the National Democrats' uncompromising political attitude and wish for political domination. While the direct cause for Pisudski's coup d'etat can be said to have sprung from his 'personal ambition and intolerance', and obsession 'with the idea of Poland's unity and greatness', it must be added that Pisudski's frustrations were partly validated by the sheer incapability of the multitude of Polish governments quickly succeeding each other of dealing with a great number of urgent and pressing matters. Thus, the reasons for the collapse of parliamentary democracy in Poland and the subsequent usurpation of power by the Nazi aggressors thereafter can be brought back to a number of reasons, of which Poland's 'own fundamental weaknesses, the instability of its institutions, and its irresponsible governments, as well as to the active and passive faults of the Great Powers' are the most important and general ones.
The list of problems and grievances that the young Polish state was thrust into from the early twenties was indeed impressive. While basic issues, such as the development of a political system and the role of minorities in the new state still had to be addressed, Poland was first confronted with 'a veritable fight for survival'.
National unity was far to be sought. The dominion claimed by Poland included vast numbers of minorities with loyalties elsewhere. Of twenty-seven million inhabitants not even 70 per cent were Polish, while 14.3 per cent were of other Slavic decent and 7.8 per cent of the population were Jewish, often not speaking Polish and many opposed to the establishment of a Polish nation. The same went for the small German minority of 3.9 per cent, whom, by conducing themselves 'in manner that was at once provocative and calculated to give notice that it regarded its status in Poland, and Poland herself, as temporary', outraged the Polish majority. A long struggle between Poland and her minorities persisted throughout the interbellum period. While it has been noted that '[n]othing the Poles did was ever right, as far as [the Jews] were concerned', there was little effort on the government's side to draw the Jews into appreciated and meaningful participation of national life. On the contrary, when Poland's first president, Gabriel Narutowicz, came to be elected with support of the bloc of minority parties, he was murdered within days after his election by the Sejm. Despite the endeks' initial condemnation of the murderer, whom saw the election of a minority-dependent president as a 'symbol of shame', he was later celebrated as a Polish nationalistic hero. Generally, the antagonistic sense existed, in which when the minorities, with the little representation they had in parliament, exercised their rightful power, it was seen as invalid and unjustified by a wide range of centre-right and rightist Polonocentric parties, thus blocking the way for meaningful political participation of the minorities.
While, to some degree, all political factions agreed with Pisudski's insistence on 'complete independence for Poland, [...] sceptical of the value of co-operation with any Russians', little was done to involve the Ukranian and Belorussian minorities in decision-making of their lot, even though Poland's border with Russia came to run 'far to the east of that originally suggested by Lord Curzon' during the Versailles conference. Pisudski's ideal of a federal model incorporating largely autonomous minority factions were soon defeated; instead there existed 'acrimony and distrust, a sort of internal war'. Moreover, while the minorities did little to contribute to a 'modus vivendi', a sense of community spirit, which might have brought more peaceful social relations, many Poles themselves were unrealistic and intolerant about the formal and informal shape Polish society must take. This had not only racial, but also religious, economic and political reasons. Pre-war conditions of many Poles created a resentful attitude toward minorities and this made it hard to deal with the minorities in a fair way.
Politically and economically antagonistic views were from the onset a mutually enforcing problem, which caused great obstacles for the creation of a healthily functioning government. Additionally, the multitude of Polish independence parties which had formerly existed, maintained their air of secrecy and 'conspiratorial character' even when government bodies had been created, which had disastrous results in the conflict between Dmowski and Pisudski, which took its toll on Poland's national interest. The passing of an overly liberal constitution based on that of France at the end of the Polish-Russian war in 1921 resulted in extreme factionism; by 1926, there existed more than 90 parties, of which around 30 parties were at times represented in the Sejm. As parliament held most power within the political structure, governments found it very difficult to pass reforms. The economy, in particular, proved a disastrously antagonising force. Extreme inflation, such as in Warsaw, where food prices with a unitary value of "100" in January 1921 rose to "1298.2" in December 1922, brought several governments to fall, while rising unemployment caused the Polish Socialist Party, the PPS, to organise strikes throughout 1924 and 1925. Dmowski and his endecja became increasingly entangled in their bid for power. While land reform was the way out for a country too poor to introduce any significantly contributing industrialisation, the National Democrats, with many landowning members, were reluctant to land redistribution of any real importance, which in turn caused the anomosity of the peasant parties. This, in all, caused land reforms to be rather ineffective and certainly insufficient. A sense of lingering problems thus left a general discontent throughout all layers of society.
Additional to internal problems, came the issue of Poland's national security. Weimar Germany continued a revisionist policy of regaining its former Prussian areas and southeastern Silesia from Poland. This caused a particular as Poland had no natural defensive barrier and the western powers, although they ratified Poland's borders to the east,  took little affirmative action against Germany's revisionist campaign, which lent its support to Germans in Poznania and Pomerania in a number of ways, thus destabilising the nation through what was essentially a very small percentage of its population.
Another form of support to the new independent state which was pressingly lacking was financial aid. Having half of its roads, railways and public buildings destroyed during the Great War, and a continuing expenditure of over 50 per cent of the state budget on defense and the railway system, the government lacked the essential funds to modernise industry and thus create employment. The absence of foreign loans and apparent disinterest in creating political stability from the western powers might have done much to help Poland establish a parliamentary democratic routine. Thus, when the British foreign office sneeringly contradicted the Soviet Union's allegation of involvement in Pisudksi's coup d'etat in a telegram to its ambassador in Moscow, arguing that '[the Russians] are of less consequence to us than they suppose', this revealed much of its indifferent attitude towards Polish politics as well.
The exigent situation that Poland was in did not go unnoticed. Pisudksi, embittered by the course of events since 1921, grew increasingly convinced that Polish 'parliamentarianism had [...] opened the door to general corruption'. But not just Pisudksi was displeased with the situation. Much of the PPS-cadre, frustrated with years of ineffective government and endek domination, now turned their hopes to Pisudksi, which prompted PPS theorist Feliks Perl to foreshadowingly argue in 1924: 'He cannot be made into a left-wing Mussolini'. PPS leader Daszyski argued that political immaturity of the state was the main cause for political feuding, but, in the beginning of 1926, also urged for immediate constitutional reforms empowering the presidential post in order to contain parliamentary quarreling.
Not just the opposition of the left had their second thoughts about the functioning of the state. In December 1925, Dmowski wrote 'if we could create even half the organization like the Fascists... I would willingly agree to a dictatorship in Poland'. Discontents with the democratic procedure and democracy as such proved different degrees of the same slippery slope, as it soon turned out. University students radicalised under the prospect of unemployment and resented the apparent greater success of their Jewish peers; they formed the leadership of fascist movements that were to increase their power-base throughout the 1930s.
Overwhelmed by problems of such dimensions, historians have argued, 'some action [...] seems in retrospect to have been almost inevitable' within the Polish political landscape. This seems, however, an unlikely viewpoint and it is worthwhile considering what other course of events politics might have taken. An internal conflict in Pisudski's course of action appears quite clearly, as when in November 1925, when Pisudski is requested to take over the rule of the country by factions of the army. He claimed he 'would never be a cause of trouble and dissention in the State'. It seems, from this, to have been rather a passionate, naturalistic sense of justice that drove him to carry out the coup d'etat than a positivistic, legal course of action. Already earlier in the twenties had Pisudski shown this duality in his character. By declining a bid for the presidency, he proudly refused 'to be enclosed in a 'gilded cage'', while apparently seeing no value in attempting reforms through coalition in the Sejm. Rather than acknowledging his objections to National Democratic domination, he slid further back into the trappings of "moral dictatorship", hereby only united the body politic in their opposition against his rule. Thus, the peasant parties united in the Sejm to resist political persecution, while his own rule alienated moderate supporters of his "parliamentary dictatorship". While open confrontation with the initially supportive socialists became ever more discernible, Pisudski still drew a Hobbesian legitimacy from the backing of the Sejm's members, which became, however, increasingly difficult to forge. When, in the end of 1929, he personally came to reopen the Sejm accompanied by a hundred armed officers, Daszyski refused to open the session 'under the threat of bayonets, guns and sabres', Pisudski abstained from openly breaching the constitution by forcefully opening the session. The failure of Pisudski's coup must thus been assessed within his own framework of legitimacy, which was to "cleanse" the parliamentary body politic. 'It is the basis of democracy, for which there is always place in Poland', he still argued in 1926. By late 1930, a number of oppositionist politicians were arrested, held captive and tortured. When eventually a number of politicians chose exile rather than imprisonment, Pisudski was as far as ever from his ideal of a federalist republic. His cabinets governed for months 'simpy by repeatedly adjourning the Sejm'. Growing older, Pisudski became an increasingly mistrustful statesman, believing in the last months before his death that 'the nation had reached real unity at last'. In reality, the new 1935 Constitution 'formally put an end to democracy', calling in a period known as the "rule of the colonels" which incorporated a mixture of nationalism and fascism.
By carrying out a coup d'etat, Pisudski essentially interfered forcefully with the democratic institutions. While initially hesitant, the sanacja's breeches of the constitution and civil rights were increasingly necessary for Pisudski to maintain power. This, however, had detrimental effects on the democratic institutions and increasingly alienated many parts of society from his government. Being insufficiently successful in curbing further economic regression into the 1930s and failing to integrate increasingly militant groups of minorities, Pisudski's failures played in the hand of the right, which made a comeback in radical form, while his sanacja leadership was increasingly chosen from a clique of military cronies. Pisudski's coup d'etat of 1926 proved, thus, not only to be ineffective on theoretical grounds, but also on practical grounds, eventually breaking with Pisudski's personal visions on good statesmanship.