In this experiment it was found:
Pipe flow will have different flow friction characteristics dependant on whether it is laminar or turbulent.
At high Reynolds numbers in turbulent flow, the roughness value of the material begins to seriously affect the friction factor, and hence its relationship with
From this roughness value, we can determine the likely material used by comparing it with known values for different materials, i.e. wood, steel, gold, etc.
The friction factor of a pipe at low
In turbulent flow, other stresses additional turbulent stresses slow the fluid down further.
These stresses influence the value of
Because of these additional shear stresses, the head loss in the pipe is greater as the fluid moves along it, resulting in the reduced flow velocity.
In laminar flow, the only stress slowing the fluid is the wall shear stress.
At low Reynolds numbers, i.e. in the transitional region, the friction factor
Turbulent flow takes a lot longer to build up a parabolic velocity profile due to the boundary layer going turbulent early on. The laminar flow forms a parabolic velocity profile faster.
Building up the velocity profile creates a positive pressure gradient travelling along the pipe, as the fluid close to the pipe wall slows down, leaving positive pressure behind it.
This experiment investigates the frictional forces inherent in laminar and turbulent pipe flow. By measuring the pressure drop and flow rate through a pipe, an estimate of the coefficient of friction (friction factor) can be obtained. Two different flow situations are studied, laminar flow and turbulent flow. The experimentally obtained values of the coefficient of friction are compared with established results by plotting them on the Moody chart.
Figure 6 shows the flow diagram of the system. Table 1 shows where pressure is measured relative to the end face of the pipe. Figure 7 is a detailed view of the pipe tappings, intake and outlet.
The apparatus consists of a horizontal pipe with tappings along the length of it. One end of the pipe is connected to a fluid reservoir which is filled from a pump. The pump takes its intake from a second pipe which runs from a reservoir at the outlet of the first pipe. This reservoir is balanced on weighing scales and a valve controls whether flow is allowed out of it. The pipe work is set up so that the Reynolds number is at a transition stage somewhere between laminar and turbulent flow, i.e. A plunger at the start of the pipe can be used to disturb the laminar flow and turn it to turbulent.
The pipe tappings are connected to a manometer similar to that shown in Figure 5. Mercury is used in the pipes as it is more dense than the oil and to aid reading the levels.
Two runs - one for LAMINAR flow and one for TURBULENT flow. In both cases:
Measure the mass flow rate and therefore
Pressure at various points along the pipe using the static holes and manometer. These results can be plotted on a graph to determine the pressure gradient
Find
Compare values with Moody chart and comment.
The entry region for both the laminar and turbulent flows should form a parabolic velocity profile a short distance down the pipe. This can be calculated for the laminar flow using
For laminar flow, the entry region should see a slight head drop for part way along the pipe due to adverse pressure gradients forming as the profile decreases. However, the first tapping should be too far down the pipe for this to be observable. This will not occur in turbulent flow because the flow is already turbulent!
Figure 4 shows that for a given flow rate, the pressure difference needed to produce said flow rate is greater than in laminar flow. There should be a similar correlation in this experiment, with a deeper pressure gradient in turbulent compared with laminar, flow. To achieve this higher pressure difference, the flow needs to slow down, as was determined for laminar flow in (8). Because of the transition to turbulent, There are additional shear stresses, These additional stresses hence increase the
Because the flow has been tripped to turbulent in the turbulent flow, one would assume that it's Reynolds number is less that that for laminar flow. However this is not the case as the apparatus is in a transitional stage and therefore the Reynolds numbers should be similar for both procedures.
The velocity is reduced when going from turbulent to laminar flow due to additional wall shear stress, Flow speed is also reduced because of the effects of surface roughness. Whether this surface roughness is dependant on Reynolds number or not can now be deduced from the results. Earlier we found that Where Using values found in the results and equation (13), we determine that
hence
Therefore the Friction Factor is dependant only on the Reynolds number, not the surface roughness. Hence the point for friction factor against Reynolds number lies along the (straight) laminar flow line of the Moody chart, as has been shown.
We can determine the value of the additional shear stresses by comparing the values obtained by (11) and (12) using the shear stress obtained here.
Looking at (11)
and (12)
Therefore it can be seen that the additional shear stresses add an extra 0.0025 onto the friction factor value. Both of these values have been added to the Moody chart (Chart 1) to show how excluding the additional forces
As
As with figure 4, a greater pressure gradient is required to produce the flow rate in turbulent flow. Hence the pressure gradient increases as the flow turns turbulent, and the speed decreases, as expected, a pattern contrary to what would have happened if the two flows had been laminar (see equation (8)), where flow speed is proportional to pressure gradient
Both flows have a velocity profile development region. The development region for the laminar flow experiment can be calculated now using
Therefore
Hence roughly 1.5m should have been needed for a parabolic velocity profile to develop. However, looking at Graph 1, we see that the flow has fully developed, i.e. there are no more adverse pressure gradients, from roughly 0.5m down the pipe. Therefore this result is flawed. In the case of turbulent flow, the velocity profile took a lot longer to develop, hence the effects cannot be seen that greatly.
For a more accurate estimation of flow in this pipe, one might want to look at the pipe roughness value in turbulent flow by taking the Reynolds number a lot higher. For different (high) values of Reynolds number, these can be compared on the Moody chart to find the roughness value
These results however could only be obtained by changing the set-up of the equipment to give different Reynolds numbers. This would involve changing the geometry of the pipe work or, better, changing the pump speed to increase
A way to get the turbulent results to correspond on the Moody chart better would be to include the additional stresses in the evaluation of the friction factor and Reynolds number in the experimental procedure.
In conclusion it is found:
The friction factor of a pipe depends largely on the wall shear stress inherent in the flow.
In turbulent flow, other stresses additional turbulent stresses slow the fluid down further.
These stresses influence the value of
Because of these additional shear stresses, the head loss in the pipe is greater as the fluid moves along it, resulting in the reduced flow velocity.
In laminar flow, the only stress slowing the fluid is the wall shear stress.
At low Reynolds numbers, i.e. in the transitional region, the friction factor
Turbulent flow takes a lot longer to build up a parabolic velocity profile due to the boundary layer going turbulent early on. The laminar flow forms a parabolic velocity profile faster.