The description of SSM is mostly based on the literature authored or co-authored by Checkland, who appears to be the best source as he is one of the fathers of SSM. In addition, copies of the lecture handouts were used.
Since I was not able to participate in the practical part of the assignment, my critical review is based on secondary literature only.
In mode 2, there are two streams of enquiry, one logic-driven and a cultural stream, which is the actual novelty.
The logic-driven stream ([1], pp. 32) is initiated by selecting relevant systems. These can be somewhere between primary task systems (systems that map to institutional boundaries) and issue-based systems (map to mental processes, not necessarily real-world entities). Metaphors can help with understanding difficult situations. The next steps are identical to SSM mode 1 outlined in the previous section.
The cultural stream, which is intertwined with the logic-driven one, tries to take into account the social and cultural environment. It consists of three analyses: the intervention, the social system and power ([3], p. 95). This section will focus on analysis 2.
The aforementioned social system is seen as an interaction between roles, norms and values ([1], p. 49). Roles are either institutionally or behaviourally defined. In an organization, they are often equivalent to task descriptions like planner, liaiser, coordinator ([1], p. 117).
Norms are a role's expected behaviours and values are defined as local standards ([1], p. 49). Norms, values and roles are historically motivated ([2], p. A15) and are hard to change from one day to the next.
Checkland ([1], p. 50) refers back to Aristotle when he describes politics as a process to accommodate different interests. This means there is a political dimension in everything, so, as it is so far-reaching, we must not ignore it.
Politics is based on power and analysis 3 asks how power is expressed in a given situation ([1], p. 50).
Power is expressed through "commodities of power":
So power can be based on something as circumstantial as "authority" (or duty?) to take meeting minutes as well as on the position in the company hierarchy.
Naturally, the mechanisms of power are on a more tacit level, so it will be difficult to get direct answers in an interview. The analyst should also avoid being too direct by asking "difficult" questions and thus jeopardizing his own authority ([1], p. 51).
In his study of East Berkshire Health Authority, Checkland ([1], pp. 118) includes "disposition of power" (who disposes of power), "nature of power" (ability to make something happen) and a short analysis about how power is obtained, exercised, preserved and passed on.
Romm [6] investigates the issue of power by asking question 3 (pp. 6):
...thus implying that SSM may cause more trouble than good by fuelling conflicts as well as benefiting those who already have power (p. 7).
Checkland claims that sometimes people have to be educated (quoted in [6], p. 8), suggesting that people have to be told what they want. This attitude towards consulting seems very patronising and it seems like the consultants who apply SSM (according to Checkland) are power-hungry themselves. (However, it is true that people often do not voice their needs and so it should be left to professionals to assess them ([1], p. 116))
There are many approaches to systems and SSM is just one of many. [5] compares and contrast a number of them, ranging from conventional systems engineering to distributed knowledge engineering and what seems to be SSM's fiercest contender, Critical Systems Heuristics (CSH). It would have been interesting to learn more about another approach in order to avoid the impression that SSM is the only way to reason about systems.
In this soft area of engineering, what matters most is probably experience in industry and being able to try out and adapt different approaches to suit the situation.
As a computer science student I hasten to add that the process of SSM seems to be quite costly (in theory it's never ending), thus consuming valuable software development time. However, there are ways of integrating both, as with SSADM (structured systems analysis and design methodology) ([3], p. 96).
Ultimately the effort may well be worth it since it adds another level of certainty that the IT solution provided will be useful to the customer in a larger context.