The case at hand deals with an internet start-up which was founded at the height of the dotcom boom and - unlike many others - has managed to grow in the following years. Its number of employees has gone up significantly since the time of writing of the case, namely from 8 to 15. The firm is still classified to be in its growth stage. Its only product is a B2B software for managing expense claims accessed entirely through browsers, which may also be a microbrowser installed on a portable device. The software is not sold - instead, companies are required to pay a monthly fee of currently 5 per user for access to the service running on Signifo's servers. This constitutes the unique selling point of their solution - being accessible worldwide and not necessitating a software package to be bought, installed and maintained.
The company's first and foremost competition comes from the expense claim procedures already in operation in almost every company. They may be informal in a small business or very bureaucratic in a big business. Either way, they exist and procedures have to be changed in order to introduce the Signifo service marketed as WebExpenses. However, the inadequacy of these processes is the main point of attack.
The only direct competitor is Concur, a North American company which is also present in the UK and Australian market. They have been in the business since 1993 and claim to be market leader. Their customer base is more diverse and the focus is on larger companies. Signifo is seeking an opportunity in the middle market, thereby attacking Concur.
In fact, there seems to be a host of expense reporting software available. For example, ExpensAble () offers enterprise-wide solutions including a version for palmtops, which also makes filing reports possible while on the road.
In spite of a stiff market, the reference list on Signifo's website features companies from an impressive range of industries and sizes. There seems to be a perceived benefit of outsourcing expense management.
What are the main benefits of WebExpenses from the customer viewpoint?
Having been so successful so far, management is looking into further growth opportunities, but doesn't want to jeopardise their achievements.
Before going ahead to make a judgement, a few fundamental questions need to be answered.
Signifo is going through a phase that is typical for companies of its size, namely making the transition from family/small team business to being a serious enterprise. Some entrepreneurs defer this step for too long as can be seen from the PCD Malton case. The founders of Signifo, however, seem motivated and capable enough to run on a more innovative strategy. The only question is, how to do it.
First of all, they should try to defend the small business market as a steady source of income. There is a danger of neglecting loyal customers and thus alienating them. They should not even notice that they are becoming less significant.
At this stage of development of the firm, some structural changes are necessary. My recommendation would be a staged approach in order to ease the transition and to minimize the risk. It would be a good idea work with distributors on a commission basis to begin with. This way, the company has more time to train a sales team of its own, which is unavoidable in the medium term.
This concept works well in conjunction with the product licensing scheme proposed by management, because companies experienced in potential markets complement Signifo's strengths. They also have more reliable marketing and distribution channels. Consequently, finding a good partner is one of the first steps to undertake.
Depending on the financial capabilities of the company, the imminent steps could be financed entirely by the company's house bank and own reserves. It is not necessary to look for venture capital at this point. That would only be necessary for the riskier alternative, as investments in sales and support can be expected to take some time until they yield returns.
At the same time, they should not forget the importance to stay ahead of the pack in terms of product quality and state-of-the-art features, so there should always be sufficient resources for continuous innovation.
Overall, it would be a mistake not to be proactive in the current situation, as the opportunity cost incurred would be much higher.