A compact gearbox design is required to use in an electric drill to produce a 25:1 speed reduction from a motor developing 36W at 9000rpm. The gearbox arrangement decided is an epicyclic two-stage reduction, each of 5:1 reduction. A DOS-based analysis tool was used for the analysis of the second stage reduction. Using a minimum recommended sun gear of 16 teeth, and a module of 1.0, a compact design of epicyclic reduction has been designed, using phosphor bronze material. The first stage of the reduction uses nylon gears. This will cut costs compared with metal gears. The same module and sun gear teeth number has been selected as the second reduction stage. Rubbing bearings hold the input and output shafts in position while a roller thrust bearing restrains the force acted on the gearbox case by the operator. The gearbox casing accommodates the gears and bearings. Seals are places and the front and rear of the gearbox. The gearbox consists of two identical halves which are located together by means of two M6 fixing screws. Comparisons with other gearboxes suggest the design is comparable with other gearboxes used in similar applications. Therefore it is believed that the gearbox is a cost-effective design which makes economic use of available space.
A battery-powered drill is driven by a 36W electric motor running at 9000 rev/min. The drill speed is to be about 360 rev/min. This reduction could be carried out in two identical stages (e.g. two epicyclic gear stages). Design the speed reduction for the drill and the bearing arrangement to carry the thrust load axially along the drill. The maximum thrust is what a user can exert onto the drill. Consider the use of plastic gears for one stage of speed reduction.
The ratio for this gearbox will be
, or 25:1.
This would be too high for a single stage reduction; hence the suggestion of a double reduction should be carried out. Quite simply this could be done using two identical reductions of 5:1.
Faigure 1 shows different combination of gear arrangement and gear trains possible. Gearbox boundaries are indicated by dotted lines and crosses mark bearing points.
A compound train system with two reduction stages. 6 bearing are required, with one on the output shaft being a thrust bearing. This design is simple and effective but would be bulky as it requires extra space for positioning of the layshaft.
An inline planetary gearing system with two epicyclic gears. The inputs are attached to the sun gear and the planets are attached to the gearbox output. The ring gear remains stationary.
A combined planetary and bevel gear arrangement for the possibility of incorporating the drill motor into the handle of the drill casing. Again the thrust bearing may have to be incorporated into the planetary gear housing.
This report will be based upon design (b). The main reasons for choosing this type of design are:
Motor is mounted in axially to chuck. As this is a battery-powered drill there will likely be little residual space in the handle considering the size of battery packs usually placed at the base.
Mounting the motor in line with the chuck reduces friction losses compared to the 90degree motion rotation experienced in (c).
3 planets means less stress on gears as torque is split three ways.
Gear train need only be fixed at four points as planets provide bearing for sun gear.
In order to begin drawing conclusions from the gearbox design, it shall be compared with other gearboxes from similar commercial units.
The drill gearbox has been designed for use in a drill assembly, such as that in Figure 9. This unit, like that in the design drawn up, has both motor and gearbox mounted in-line in the drill casing. The gearbox is mounted ahead of the motor and disappears under the torque adjuster. The similarity of this drill to the one designed shows is a good indication that it is a good design. However, is more appropriate to compare the internals of the gearboxes: this will aid an understanding that the correct mechanism and mechanical arrangement was chosen.
Gearbox A is a cordless handheld drill with a variable speed controller. Figure 10 and Figure 11 show cross-sectional and exterior views of the gearbox respectively. Although no descriptive text is available for the gearbox, it appears that, from Figure 10, the gearbox is driven from a motor in a handle via a straight-cut gear on the end of input shaft (17) onto a bevel gear (19). This provides the first speed reduction of approximately 16:1. There are three choices of speed reduction, therefore there should be three methods of speed selection. It appears that the input shaft (16) on which the bevel gear (19) is fixed has a spur gear attached or machined at its left hand end which engages a layshaft (29). It appears that the speed is selected by a number of dog clutches (14), probably by the use of selector forks. Thus power is then transmitted either through spur gear (30) or (30`). The selectors (14) is most likely located on a splined section of the output shaft and can hence slide along there. The third speed reduction may well be electronic.
Figure 12 and Figure 13 show an exploded and non-exploded internal view respectively, of a second gearbox drawing. The gearbox (12) is a 'floating' design on a spring 26 to restrain its movement during hammer operating. The gearbox houses a planetary system consisting of a ring gear (34), planet gear carrier (29), sun gear (11) and planet gears (not shown).
Figure 14 and Figure 15 show a cross-sectional view of the complete drill assembly and gearbox assembly respectively. Again, the gearbox is driven from a motor in the handle providing a speed reduction of around 16:1. From Figure 15, it appears that the output is driven by two epicyclic gear reductions: through planet gears (21) and (33); planet gear carriers (25) and (36).
Using the analysis programs and manual analysis techniques, a gearbox design consisting of two epicyclic gear arrangements can be produced, with the specifications and details described in previous sections. It is expected that the gearbox should be sufficient and cost effective enough to provide a ground point for the development of a gearbox for the situation required. The gearbox is made from a combination of nylon and phosphor bronze gears for the 1 st and 2 nd reduction stages respectively. The choice of nylon gears for the 1 st reduction will hopefully allow a cost-effective solution to the gearbox problem. A suitable factor of safety has been included for both reduction stages. The gearbox casing allows the accommodation of the gears and suitable seals and bearings.
In comparing the design in this report to other drill gearbox designs, it is concluded that the layout and size of the gearbox is comparable to designs of other handheld drill gearboxes. However, it may prove suitable, upon selection of a driving motor, to place said motor in the handle of the drill, and hence create a reduction, by bevel or worm gear, from the motor to the gearbox. The choice of epicyclic gears, as demonstrated, facilitates the inclusion of speed reduction techniques by rotating the ring gear by a variable amount to vary the ratio.