The purpose of this paper is to discuss whether the alignment of business with information technology (IT) could be a possible way to gain a decisive competitive advantage on organizational performance. The paper examines on the possibilities and necessities of alignment by evaluating sources, ideas and researches of different authors and provides an insight on the diversity of prior research on alignment. Such a deduction provides firms with a platform on several contingency factors of alignment where they position within their respective industries.
The fervent debate concerning strategic alignment of business and IT is under discussion for many years. Businesses are investing decades of time and billions of dollars to struggle for achieving competitive advantage by using information systems. However, as Luftman and Oldach (1996) state, organizations seem hard to position itself and identify their long term benefits by harnessing the capabilities of IT. This 'competitive advantage' paradox has been both generally supported (Venkatraman 1989, Niederman et al 1991, Earl, 1993, Boynton et al 1996, Davidson 1996) and condemned (Carr 2003) in the literature. As a consequence, there is no precise, commonly agreed notion of preposition of alignment as well as the contribution of information technology to the success of organizations.
Business-IT alignment is defined as a process of 'applying IT in an appropriate and timely way and in harmony with business strategies, goals, and needs'. (Brier and Luftman 1999) In this paper, applying business-IT alignment as a mean to strive for competitive advantage in dynamic marketplace as the underlying theory (Adcock et al 1983, Cardinali 1992, Faltermayer 1994), possible antecedents of alignment are analyzed to give insights on the extent in which IT contributes to the business success.
The importance of business-IT alignment is widespread in IS research literature. Papp (1995) indicates that this concept has documented since the late 1970s (McLean and Soden 1977, IBM 1981, Parket and Benson 1988, Mills 1986, Brancheau and Wetherbe 1987). Alignment addresses a coherent goal across different departments with IT perspectives. Such cohesive organization goal and IT strategies enable better leveraging the business - IT partnership. This harmony can be extended and applied to help the organization in identifying new opportunities. (Papp 1999)
Brier and Luftman (1999) point out that the traditional methods for planning the business strategies have not taken full advantage of IT. That is one of the main reasons why organizations fail to realize the underlined potential of their IT investments (Barclay et al 1997). Brier and Luftman (1999) adopt and modify Henderson and Venkatraman s' (1989) strategic alignment model (Fig. 1), which in concert with their enablers (enabling activities) / inhibitors (inhibiting activities) research from 1992 to 1997 consecutively.
Brier and Luftman (1999) interviewed the executives and obtained the data from consultants' engagements and eventually identified six most important enablers and inhibitors for business-IT alignment. They argue that by maximizing alignment enablers and minimizing inhibitors through a six-step approach, strategic alignment of business with IT can be achieved.
Even the fervent adherent in the context of business IT alignment cannot deny that the frameworks and concepts developed is not at all unequivocal. Various dimensions of strategic alignment, such as the degree of alignment against productivity, are amphibious. It creates rooms to explore whether all organizations are well-served and benefited equally by allocating scarce resources to improve alignment and whether the adoption of particular business strategy or industry influences the extent to alignment matters.
Not surprisingly, severe critique has been given on the difficulties and necessities of business IT alignment (Keen 1996, Ciborra 1998, Ciborra and Hanseth 1998). Carr's (2003) theory on the role of IT is well known in the literature. He claims that as IT's power and availability have expanded, strategic value of IT investment decreased. IT is shifting from a potential source of competitive capabilities to just a cost of doing business. It is essential, but not strategic resource in the organization. Therefore, IT and business alignment do not matter anymore as IT can no longer provide the organizations with competitive advantages. In his opinion, the key of managing IT and business units is not seeking advantages of alignment, but is defensively cautioned for the cost and risks in IT investment.
Several possible antecedents of alignment deal with business - IT alignment as illusory, even inexpedient (Ciborra 1998, Maes 1999). Business developments are not solely depended on IT development. Even the rigid installation of IT infrastructure might be confined by the industry standards or political requirements. That's what Arthur (1988, 1994) called self-reinforcing mechanisms to the organization in economics. Chan (2002) argues that total business and IT alignment is complex and difficult to achieve. Earl (1996) further states that alignment is hard to achieve unless an understanding and shared vision within the organization, from top managers to front line staff. However, objectives are not always fully appreciated down the line in an organization, where series of decisions are taken by various level of management. For examples, details of the hardware, software and operation platforms might be reflected in an emphasis on cutting costs rather than adding value by the line management. Besides, many authors (Coakley et al 1996 and Ciborra 1998) question the measurability of the degree of business IT alignment. As alignment is a continuous process that requires monitoring over a long period of time and handling contingencies if necessary, difficulties on evaluating and measuring its effectiveness remain a major obstacle to alignment.
Nicholas Carr's (2003) discussion on the role of IT has been widely examined. His source of idea based on the argument that IT - carries digital information just as railroads carry goods and power grids carry electricity, has become merely commoditized product and no longer confers competitive advantages, and thus contribute to the unnecessary to any alignment with business. His theory of commoditization of IT, with electricity and railroad analogy, however, do have their limitations and constraints. (Brown et al 2003) IT systems are not analogous as standard electricity or the railway gauges, rather than any confinement or standardization, the continuous improvement in processing power and performance have had a multiplicative effect coming together, leading to an extension to its reach to other areas like biological organisms and RFID. Furthermore, IT brings about new practices and possibilities for the organization to create and compete in the marketplace (Brown et al 2003).
Although the prior studies on business - IT alignment has been helpful in general, many previous researches have ignored the notion of context dependency employed in the real world (Goedvolk et al 2000). This paper thus examines and evaluates the antecedents of alignment and provides insights into why prior research on business - IT alignment may have reported diverse and sometimes conflicting findings. In fact, different organizational structure (both formal and informal), social dimensions, industries and business practices are likely to apply to different approaches and degrees of alignment (even it is misaligned) (Brown and Magill 1998, Ciborra 1998). In other words, implications of alignment (or misalignment) depend on various contingency factors, like organizational size, marketplace, social and political concerns, internal and external relationship, industry or strategy.
The influence of contingency factors on business - IT alignment can be illustrated in the well established typology of business strategy, including Prospector, Defender, Analyzer and Reactor (Miles and Snow 1978, Chan and Sabherwal 2001). Prospectors are those who seek for new product opportunities and emphasis on flexibility and innovation. They usually engage in dynamic marketplace and efficiency - oriented operations. Defenders desire for stability and cost containment. They function in a predictable environment with a mechanistic organization structure. Analyzers concentrate on pursuing the flexibility and efficiency simultaneously. They employ a matrix structure to achieve innovation while maintaining the economies of scale to their core products. Reactors are excluded here as they employ an unconscious strategy, according to Pearce and Zahra (1990).
Chan and Sabherwal s' (2001) study reveals an insight where different business approaches contribute to different degree of alignment. For examples, in mining industry, organization strategy tends to be defensive as the market environment is largely predictable (Defender). It is easier for them to achieve alignment but lesser advantages provided (Chan et al 2006), perhaps due to the fact that they do not have an urgent need compared to the Prospectors and Analyzers (Keen 1996).
To conclude, for IT managers, this paper provides a platform to consider on various approaches of alignment. However, towards a contingency approach, this suggests that future study should be more market, structural or strategy specific in order to gain a more reliable result in a given research situation.