The microprocessor industry is one of the most profitable industries (Intel's gross margins can reach 47% on average), virtually dominated by Intel (Kharif, 2002). AMD gained its share from 13% to 20% in 2001. However, the industry is changing in profound ways. Since the introduction of the first microprocessor, processor manufacturers have applied themselves to one aim: squeezing ever more transistors onto a single chip (IBM, 2006). The number of transistors (the electronic devices used to power the calculation) per every unit area has been increased dramatically over years (Intel, 2006). In general, this can be translated into a significant increase in the performance of computer processor. Gordon E. Moore (Intel, 2006), co-founder of Intel, claims that the semi-conductor (microprocessor) performance would double every two years for the foreseeable future. Appendix figure 1 indicates the evolution of microprocessors' performance (Tuomi, 2002).
The two underlined game rules in microprocessor industry are "being first" and "being popular". "Being first" means that the player need to pursue in the technological race. The first company who can build the next generation processor and produce in volume could win a large market share. The followers have to adjust their strategy and development constrained by the first mover's decision. "Being popular" means that the players in the game need to build up their complementary assets, like brands and partnerships. This helps them to penetrate the market and gain the support and adoption from the customers for their innovations (Chaia et al, 2005).
In order to understand the competitive forces that act on the industry, Porter's five forces analysis of microprocessor industry is shown in table 1 (Porter, 1980, Porter and Millar, 1985).
According to Professor Henderson (2006), there should be at least two more competitive forces in a particular industry, namely "Complementors" and "Political, regulatory and institutional context". Complementors are referred to two businesses with respect to a customer which they sell a product (or products) that complement the product of another company by adding value to them. For instance, "Wintel" alliance (Microsoft and Intel) creates more value in the eye of customer than promotes each product alone. That's also Andrew Grove, former CEO of Intel called "the Sixth force" (Brandenburger and Nalebuff, 1996). Political, regulatory and institutional force refers to the guidance and power influence exerted from political parties and professional bodies that might shape the industry. A good example is the restriction of technological transfer from United States to other countries.
However, the industry structure is not static and the actions of the different players will deeply influence the evolution of industry. For instance, the adoption of Intel strategic moves has not only shaped the nature of competition in the industry but also likely changed the industry structure as well (Chaia et al, 2005).
Innovative capability, as Francis and Bessant (2005 p.172) define, is "an underlying capacity to gain advantage by implementing more and better ideas than rivals". They further point out that the capability might not be necessarily a set of attributes, but indeed, different kinds of innovation might require distinctive approaches.
From the analysis of industry background and company capabilities, it is obvious that AMD main threat is coming from its enormous competitor, Intel. With its huge market influence and resource, Intel is able to shape the industry structure as well as the forms of competition. They lock out AMD by their complementary capabilities on innovation speed, complementor system and proprietary standard (figure 5).
To combat with the Intel's blockage, there is a call for the strategic review of existing innovation strategy at AMD.