Information strategy is generally accepted to be of considerable benefit and increasingly recognised as critical to organizational success. However, most of the academic researches are focusing on reaping the advantages from large company prospects. The developed frameworks in small and medium enterprises (SMEs) are sparse. This paper aims to provide a discussion on how to develop a sustainable management information strategy (MIS) / information system strategy (ISS). By analysing the specificity of a SME, Rembitt in our case, the strategic importance of systems integration (SI) in the formulation of MIS/ISS is highlighted, attaining an extension of MIS for achieving competitive advantage.
Information strategy becomes popular in many industries. However, the definition is ambiguous. The Joint Information Systems Committee (JISC, 1998) describes it as a set of attitudes and values that lead to a shared vision of the future of the organization. Rather a nebulous concept, Orna (2004 p.8-9) stated information strategy as the "detailed expression of information policy in terms of objectives, targets and actions to achieve them for a defined period ahead. Information strategy provides the framework for the management of information".
Some authors (Galliers et al, 1999; Levy and Powell, 2000; Earl, 1989) tend to use the concept of ISS to explain the issue. Indeed, the majority of this paper is devoted to discussing the ISS rather than the MIS, and there are two reasons for this. Firstly, information systems play a central issue in MIS in most of the organizations, including the SMEs in the case. Information systems give us the means to collect, sort, analyse and query data to support the strategic information process (Levy and Powell, 2005). Thus, ISS is an important subset of MIS for the organizations. Secondly, there are more academic literatures or reported works on ISS than there are solely on MIS that are of relevance to the interpretive approach in SMEs.
In teams of the nature of ISS, Earl (1989) provides a useful framework to distinguish between the formulation or development of ISS, and management perspectives to its implementation which he describes as information management (IM) strategy. All of these aspects are closely-related, demonstrated in figure 1.
Earl provides a wide range of description of different approaches in each of these areas. Essentially, these three levels of strategy recognise the different prescriptive views of academic literature on ISS. However, as most SMEs do not have an IS department (Levy and Powell, 2005) or plan their IS (Hagmann and McCahon, 1993). The inter-relationship of strategy is not well-defined. In this paper, instead, Levy and Powell's ISS model (Levy and Powell, 2000) for ISS is introduced which could broadly be considered to be in the spirit of SMEs specificity.
Levy and Powell's ISS framework (Levy and Powell, 2000), adapting from Walsham's themes (1993) for IS strategy, defines the key issues that should be addressed in developing a sustainable ISS (figure 2). It focuses on the role of information and information systems in supporting strategic objectives of the company. There are three main areas to be discussed, namely business context, business process and strategic content. They provide the insights on the analytical approach towards the issues in SMEs perspective.
Most of the frameworks and models are developed on the basis of large company. However, the problems encountered by SMEs are different, requiring different approaches. The aspects of specificity in SMEs might have effects on the development and implementation in ISS and therefore should be considered. Blili and Raymond (1993) state five characteristics of the specificity of SMEs with respect to strategic ISS: environment specificity, organizational specificity, decisional specificity, psycho-sociological specificity and information systems specificity (Appendix).
In the Rembitt case, the challenges in figure 3 encourage a radical transformation of its information systems. A system integration approach is introduced as a solution by the new Managing Director (MD), Alan Thompson.
Systems integration (SI) is becoming more and more popular to be one of the major drivers for ISS, and it is demonstrated by the massive investments in Material Requirement Planning Systems and later Enterprise Resource Planning Systems, and extend it forward to the integrated Customer Relationship Management Systems and Vendor Management Systems with the channels (Finnegan, 2006). However, the complex nature and functions of SI have made it difficult to define and bound (Wainwright and Waring, 2004). Boykin, Corbitt and Sandoe (2001, p.7) define SI as "(bringing) isolated information systems together with the goal of providing a whole or complete information resource for organizations" consist of the external integrations with supplier and customers and internal integrations within the organization.
In summary this paper discusses the key issues in developing a MIS/ISS. From Rembitt case, the extent to which SI can play a critical part of developing an information strategy is illustrated. Two frameworks are also discussed with reference to the specificity of SMEs in adopting ISS and SI. Further research is needed to examine the extent to which power issues influence the adoption of particular SI practices in developing ISS.