A few years ago, Since then, this process improvement has not been independently assessed to see how far it satisfies customers. In this paper, we will describe, analyse and evaluate the service quality of This will show us areas of investigation or improvement for the service. For this purpose, we will use the original SERVQUAL tool, developed by Parasuraman and al (1988), to assess its "validity" in such environment.
In the search for competitive advantage, universities not only build on their education but also on the extra services like accommodation. We were interested to study the Staff and Family Accommodation Service as visiting lecturers and mature students are a strategic segment for the universities. The SFAS (Staff and Family Accommodation Service) service concept can be clearly defined with the following statement from managers (other excerpts in Appendix):
The SFAS includes 133 properties: 112 one/two bedrooms, 19 three bedrooms and 2 four bedrooms ignored in this study. Demand outstrips supply: 3 applications per house. Current tenants are from 33 nationalities. The average length of stay is one academic year (9 months) and tenants are spread with 33% single, 29% couples and 38% families. Staff and students represent 80% of tenants and the rest are visiting academics who stay less than 6 months.
The questionnaire consists of 16 questions, five points Likert scale, grouped into the 5 dimensions: tangibles (7 questions), reliability (3), responsiveness (2), assurance (2), empathy (2). It was developed from discussions with 3 current tenants to insure the questions were clear enough and covered main housing issues. The questions were worded positively to suit with findings and suggestions from the literature (Parasuraman et al, 1991). The questionnaire can be seen in appendix 1. 40 tenants were given the questionnaire by hand, with guidance about the way to fill it: e.g. difference between expectations and perceptions, scale spread. They were chosen to represent the diverse demographic profile: 3 diverse locations, staff or students, families with or without children, singles or couples, length of stay between 3 years and 3 months. Two forms were given to any couple because only one was linked to the university with studies or lectures. We assumed that needs might be different.
Within 2 days, 20 completed questionnaires were returned representing all the subgroups listed above. 3 questionnaires were rejected for suspicion about the quality of filling: questions skipped; same marks for all.
The models proposed by Parasuraman and al are the most widely verified and applicable instruments used to analyse the data. However, we simplified it and did not consider using the weighted dimensions or the alpha coefficients. Yet, we emphasized the tangible aspects with more questions in the questionnaire to follow comments from customers about the relative importance of this dimension for the accommodation service.
Data from questionnaires were entered onto a spreadsheet. Quality scores were obtained as Q=P-E, i.e. subtracting expectations from performance ratings. Expectation or perception scores were simply the arithmetic mean of all respondents.
Despite having 2 questionnaire forms, managers decided to share their views and handed over one filled questionnaire. To collect management views, we arranged an hour interview with the two very helpful managers, who provided a wealth of information (see Appendix 2). Similarly, tenants were invited to comment on the questionnaire, about their experience during their stay.
'
This paper assessed the usefulness of SERVQUAL for this context. The gap and segmentation analysis directed us to unexpected findings, neither from the management survey, nor from the customers' comments. Further research is required to disaggregate the telecommunication variable and assess the core reason of customer dissatisfaction. Yet, service quality assessment is an ongoing process which needs to be done regularly to spot the trends in customer satisfaction.