The ASB has defined the objective of financial statements as being: "to provide information about the financial position, performance, and the financial adaptability of an enterprise that is useful to wide range of users in making economic decisions"
Financial statements are primary information that firms publish about themselves to the investors, who are the primary users of financial statements, to make reasoned investment decisions about alternative uses of scarce resources in the conduct of business and economic activities. The three main financial statements are the Balance Sheet, the Cash Flow statement, and the Income statement. These statements help analyze the business by translating economic factors into accounting numbers like assets, sales, cash flows and earnings.
Financial statement analysis is an art of extracting information from financial statements. Valuation models, which in turn provide the basis for understanding and evaluating the decision usefulness of accounting practices, are based on information in the financial statements and consistent forecasts of future performance.
In order to generate plausible predictions about the future performance, we should use industry, strategy and governance analysis in the forecasting process, differentiate between recurring and non-recurring items in the income statement, use the correct valuation model in step with the accrual system of accounting and clean surplus, and check that accounting policies are appropriate and do not give a misleading indication of future potential. Financial statement analysis 'is not an end in itself,'
According to Ben Best, Comparison of financial statements forms the basis for much financial analysis.
The constant research conducted on financial statement analysis, provide us with much food for thought. Different aspects of reporting and valuation have been tested to shed light on the grey areas and give rise to better accounting standards while at same time making sure that the value relevance of financial analysis is not diminishing.
A paper by Paul Hribar & Daniel Collins on It is based on the presumed articulation between changes in balance sheet working capital accounts and accrued revenues and expenses on the income statement, which breaks down when non-operating activities like M&A, divestitures and translation of foreign subsidiary' accounts are present.
Another article by David Aboody, John Hughes & Jing Liu discusses They analytically examine the impact of market inefficiencies on the estimation of coefficients in value relevance regressions and derive a procedure that corrects potential biases caused by such inefficiencies in 1) the value relevance of earnings and book values; 2) the value relevance of residual income value estimates; and 3) the value relevance of accruals and cash flows. The findings show that cash flows map into returns with a statistically significantly higher coefficient than accruals after adjustment for future returns, while the two coefficients are statistically indistinguishable from each other when stock price is not adjusted.
The topic of stock options is another popularly tested one. Carol A Marquardt conducts an empirical analysis on
Valuation models and their applicability have undergone several analyses. J. Francis, P.Olsson and D.R Oswald in their study on ' This superiority of the AE value is mainly driven by the sufficiency of book value of equity as a measure of intrinsic value and the predictability of abnormal earnings.
In summary, the traditional way of accounting should be altered to incorporate the ever-changing ways of the economy, and reflect the true picture of a company to its investors. Only then can accounting statements justify the decision of investors and actions of firms.
In the words of Roger Davis, (ICAEW representative), ' ...the advance of corporate reporting will require innovation and experimentation rather than rule setting. The portrait of a company in a new era of accountability means crafting the picture rather than painting by numbers...'