Parity conditions play a key role in the comprehension of international financial markets and in a decision maker's strategic posture towards the markets. The parity conditions are 'benchmarks'. When they hold, they imply points of indifference between two financial choices and when invalid they indicate market forces favoring one alternative over another. Empirical analysis and evidence on departures from parity are most intriguing, as a violation of parity implies that opportunities exist which can be exploited or arbitraged away.
Purchasing power parity (PPP) is a theory of exchange rate determination; a way to compare the average costs of goods and services between countries. The theory assumes that the actions of traders, motivated by cross-country price differences, induce changes in the exchange rate. In another vein, PPP suggests that transactions on a country's current account, affect the value of the exchange rate on the foreign exchange market.
The Law of one price (LOP) forms the foundation of the PPP theory, which states that in the absence of transportation and other transaction costs, competitive markets will equalize the price of an identical good in two countries, expressed in the same currency. Algebraic representation:
Where St is the nominal exchange rate expressed as the domestic price of the foreign currency. The absolute version, states that the exchange rate is equal to the ratio of prices of the two countries in the long run. Another form - Relative PPP, suggests that the percentage change in the exchange rate is equal to the percentage change in the price for two countries. This theory suggests that exchange rates act in a way to counteract changes in the price levels between countries and equilibrate the purchasing power of the currencies. Formal version:
Real exchange rate (RER) is the, nominal exchange rate deflated by a ratio of foreign and domestic price levels:
Where R The logarithmic form:
PPP implies that the nominal exchange rate is equivalent to the difference in price levels. Consequently, short run deviations are equal to the log of the exchange rate plus the difference in price levels where
If An important consequence of PPP is that the RER between countries should not vary in the long run: Arbitrage and other effects should act to negate differences in purchasing power. These long run stabilizing forces implied by PPP thus make stationarity a vital consequence to the theory.
Empirical evidence about the validity of the PPP hypothesis has produced mixed results and developed along with advances in econometric techniques. Empirical tests confirm that PPP is a poor description of exchange rate behaviour in the short run due to exchange rate volatility and sticky prices, but in the longer run, PPP offers a good guide. The LOP was tested by the Big Mac Index published in 'The Economist'. This 'Hamburger standard' shows the difference in the average price of a Big Mac in various countries. As Peter Isard (1977) stated, "...the law of one price is flagrantly and systematically violated by empirical data..." Frankel (1980) found evidence in favour of PPP in hyperinflationary countries and no evidence for countries with low and moderate inflation. Examination of the RER equation provided the need for stationarity. This is - currencies go through periods of undervaluation and overvaluation that can be large, but there is tendency for PPP to reassert itself as time passes. Such investigations have tested the hypothesis of non-mean reversion against the alternative of mean reversion. Roll (1979) and Adler also tested the hypothesis that PPP follows a random walk. Kenneth Rogoff (1996) suggests that for a broad sample of countries, deviations from PPP maybe around 3 to 5 years, PPP deviations dampen out at the rate of 15% per year. According to Mark Taylor and David Peel (2000) the speed of return to PPP may increase when the deviation is larger. Balassa (1964) and Samuelson (1964) posited the productivity differential model concluding that the biggest difficulty in testing PPP is that the RER may change, thus leading to the failure of PPP.
Present research tests PPP under three different specifications
Since all variables in the PPP relationship are prices series so we may assume them to be non-stationary. We can establish the
1.  The ACF does not decay if the series is non-stationary. However, this inspection needs to be supplemented.
2.  The principle behind the ADF equation is to test for the presence of a unit root in the coefficient of lagged variables. If the value of the coefficient of a lagged variable is one (1), then the regression exhibits the properties of a nonstationary, random walk process indicating that shocks imparted to the RER will be permanent, it won't be mean reverting and its long-run equilibrium will not exist. The regression model for the test of the RER is:
The H The ADF Test is conducted first in levels and then for the differenced series until the H The choice of lagged variables is very important as any misspecification can lead to errors.
 Both the above-mentioned tests suffer from the problem that the H
 Such a test is more meaningful in testing PPP to have the economic hypothesis of a constant RER coincide with the statistical null hypothesis of stationarity.
We now explain the As Granger notes, " A test for cointegration can be thought of as a pre test to avoid spurious regression situations." Cointegration analysis tells us that any two non-stationary series that are integrated of the same order, are cointegrated if a linear combination exists, which itself is stationary. That is the non-stationarity of one series exactly offsets that of the other, establishing a long run relationship.
5.  The first step is to estimate the long run relationship:
We test the residual term for a unit root, if this null hypothesis is rejected it indicates that Cointegration exists, which is a necessary condition for long-run PPP. Therefore we estimate an ECM for the spot exchange rate in step 2. However this model suffers from a number of problems. Firstly, the model assumes that the regressors are weakly exogenous for the long run parameters. Secondly, it is not possible to carry out any hypothesis tests of the cointegrating relationship at stage 1. In addition, there could exist a simultaneous equation bias.
6.    The first stage in implementation is estimation of the unrestricted VAR (Vector Autoregressive) Model and the choice of a lag variable, to ensure that the error terms are normally distributed and linearly independent. We use the Maximum eigenvalue statistic and the trace statistic to obtain the Cointegration rank. Secondly, we test the hypothesis based on the cointegrating vectors and adjustment parameters which can be used to test the validity of PPP, as well as the weak exogeneity assumption of the Engle-Granger Model.
This analysis was carried out, to test the PPP relationship between UK and US using the wholesale (PPI/WPI) price series for both countries as well as the spot exchange rate USD/GBP as data, which was downloaded from Ecowin database.
The Purchasing Power Parity between the UK and US is tested by employing the different methods described. Results signify only a partial evidence of long-run PPP between UK and US.
The ADF and P-P tests indicated stationarity in levels and non-stationarity in differences of the series. Conversely the KPSS test provides evidence that the real exchange rate may be stationary.
The Engle-Granger Model found no Cointegration between the nominal exchange rate and inflation in the two countries. Alternatively, the Johansen tests established that there exist two cointegrating vectors. PPP restrictions on the long-run parameters were rejected.
It is not an unusual finding in empirical tests, and calls for better quality financial information on prices and reduction of measurement errors.
Consequently, the results conclude that 'the use of PPP theory should be approached with a general caution'.
The only authentic conclusion that can be drawn is that, further extensive studies are necessary to promote our understanding of the exchange rate behavior.