UK sales in 2004/2005 totalled Group sales totalled So the proportion of UK sales to group sales was 79.6%.
Overseas capital expenditure was Group capital expenditure was So the proportion of capital expenditure overseas to group capital expenditure was 30.86%.
Tesco.com made money. Profits were
Tesco Personal Finance made money too. It made
According to the Directors' report, the company is not aware of any ordinary shareholders with interests of 3% or more. However almost a third of shareholders, over 86,000 people, are members of staff.
The auditors are an independent company, PriceWaterhouseCoopers LLP, Chartered Accountants and Auditors. They give the company a clean bill of health. The report doesn't disclose the amount that they are paid.
In 2005, net borrowings were as follows:
In 2004, net borrowings were as follows:
So total net borrowings have
The balance sheet values are conservative due to the prudence concept. This implies that the accountants should be cautious in the valuation of assets. The lowest reasonable estimate of an asset's value should be taken. The directors state they believe the market value of the properties of the group to be in excess of the book value of They go on to state that in the year they received We can interpret from this that perhaps this amount was not included in the book value due to it not being absolutely certain (the prudence concept).
A first impression based on the profit and loss account is that the company performed well.
The share price performance is an improvement on last year. This is largely related to the Directors' pay having a high performance-related component to it.
The remuneration committee is made up of non-executive Directors. Their remuneration is not directly affected by the performance of the company. One of the roles of the committee is to ensure that the level and structure of remuneration is designed to attract, retain, and motivate Executive Directors needed to run the company. For this reason the remuneration policy is structured so that the fixed element (base salary) is a smaller component (20%-40%) of the total remuneration, compared to the performance related elements. The performance-related elements are:
Short term performance
A cash bonus is based on achievement, as is a deferred share bonus. This element of compulsory deferred shares ensures a stronger link between incentives received and shareholder value delivered.
Long term performance
The performance Share Plan (PSP) and share options assure a focus on long term business success.
Almost a third of shareholders, about 86,000 people, are staff. Since the remuneration of the Directors is strongly linked to shareholder value delivered, the profit sharing of these shareholders increases as the Directors' performance-related pay increases.
In addition, the Shares in Success scheme is for the benefit of employees with at least one year's service, including Executive Directors. Here again, profit sharing amongst employees is strongly linked to performance of Executive Directors.
The employment costs for wages and salaries were The average number of full-time equivalents was: UK 163,006, Rest of Europe 47,204 and Asia 32,770. The average pay of an employee on a pro-rata full-time basis was
The employment costs including social security costs and pensions was Applying the same approach as above, the average cost to Tesco plc of each full-time equivalent was
For the previous year, the calculations as above yield:
The average pay of an employee on a pro-rate full-time basis: Hence there was a
2005
The average cost to Tesco plc of each full-time equivalent: Hence there was an
The average store size can be calculated by dividing the total sales area by the number of stores. This yields:
The average store size rose from 2001 to 2002 then dropped considerably in 2003. It then steadily rose to 2005.
Sales per square foot can be calculated by dividing the group sales by the total sales area. This yields:
Sales per square foot fell from 2001 to 2003 and then rose from 2003 to 2005.
The four part strategy has been the foundation of Tesco's success in recent years. In 2004/5 the growth in new business - in international, in non-food, and in retailing services - contributed as much profit as the entire business was making in 1997.
Core UK Business (score: 9)
Tesco did indeed continue to grow. UK sales grew by 11.9% including a like-for-like increase of 9.0%. It expanded its customer base by 2 million, added three new Extra stores at Dumfries, Stockport and Stafford, and converted 202 T&S stores. This level of growth scores a 9 since, although excellent, the percentage growth is considerably lower than the other elements of the strategy.
Non-food (score: 10)
Sales growth in non-food in was excellent. Sales growth in UK was 17%, far exceeding that of Core UK Business, and thereby making progress towards the goal of being as strong in non-food as food. For this reason this element of the strategy scores a perfect 10.
Retailing services (score: 9)
Tesco.com sales grew by 24.1%, adding eDiets and Legal Store and expanding the non-food ranges online, thus contributing to "following the customer into new areas". In Telecoms, Tesco now have a million customer accounts including broadband internet access, mobiles, domestic fixed line and internet access, again proving that it is certainly following the customer into new areas. This last business is still in its startup phase and made a small operating loss of For this reason this component scores a 9 rather than a perfect 10.
International (score: 10)
The objective of long-term organic growth was evident in the 98 new stores being opened during the year, adding 3.1m sq ft of selling area.
In Europe, evidence of organic growth can be seen in Czech Republic where Tesco has been meeting the more competitive market conditions by, for example, accelerating their new store development, with three openings in the year. Similar action has been taken in Slovakia.
In Asia, excellent organic store development was evident in Thailand, Korea, Taiwan, Malaysia and Japan, particularly in hypermarkets. Most of this development was in the pipeline, but is evidence of the long term organic growth programme, which scores a perfect 10.