A crystalline solid is a closely packed lattice of ions with uniform and symmetrical arrangement. In the case of cubic crystals this symmetry is 3 dimensional and we are able to characterise any compound by a lattice parameter 'a' that will be the same for any sample of that compound. The positioning of ions within the crystal will vary for each compound due to the size and bonding nature between atoms. A very common crystal structure is that of Sodium Chloride, commonly known as table salt, shown in Figure 1, where we can clearly see the uniform arrangement of Na+ and Cl- ions. This figure represents a 'unit cell' of NaCl, which, by a simple repeating pattern would describe the complete composition of that substance. This unit cell can be expressed for any cubic crystal, and a value that closely follows this is the lattice parameter , 'a' which is simply the lengths of the sides of the unit cell. Unlike the figure, the ions would be touching and therefore 'a' will depend only on the size of radius of ions within the cell and hence any sample of NaCl will have this same 'a' value.
Also shown in the figure is a further characteristic of crystals 'd' which is the distance between adjacent layers or 'planes' of ions. This is known as the plane separation, and to be fully understood we must firstly refer to the 'Miller Indices' (h k l) used to describe cubic crystals. In reference to the unit cell of length 'a':
The Miller Indices are used to represent a crystal type by the order atoms are arranged to create parallel planes. In reference to the unit cell as a 3 dimensional image in the x, y and z co-ordinates, the Miller Indices refer to h, k and l that represent the 1/x, 1/y and 1/z positions on the axes of this unit cell respectively. The d hkl value can be related to the lattice parameter 'a' using
(1)
Hence, and also shown in Figure 2 we can see that d 100 = a. In the case of cubic structures the three most common types of lattice are the simple (or primitive) cubic of symbol (P), the face centred cubic (F) and the body centred cubic (I). These are shown in Figure 3 and it should be clear why they are named so, given the position of the atoms in the unit cell. It is then important to show that only certain (hkl) values are allowed for each type of cubic structure, which plays a large role when determining the crystal type (e.g. P, F or I) based on the d values detected. For the simple cell all (hkl) are allowed, for face centred only combinations of all odd or all even (hkl) are possible, e.g. (111), (200), (311), and for body centred only combinations where the sum h+k+l is even are allowed e.g. (110), (200), (211).
These certain allowed values mean that for each of the three types of crystal the 'd' values will produce a distinct pattern, for example for a body-centred cubic they are evenly spaced. From this pattern and furthermore by indexing these values we can determine the type of cubic structure of any given crystal once we know these plane spacing values. By equation (1) we can calculate the lattice parameter 'a' and we can also later use these pieces of information and certain software to identify the chemical compounds of the substance we wish to study. These are the three main aims of this experiment, which are all derived from obtaining lattice separation values 'd' for certain crystals. The method with which we obtain these results is known as the process of X-Ray diffraction.
X-Rays are defined as high frequency electromagnetic radiation produced when high-speed electrons strike a solid target. In this experiment we use the fundamental property of x-rays in that they are very high-energy beams and so they will penetrate all materials to reveal information about the inner structure of most substances. If we irradiate a crystal with such a beam, it will interact with the atoms in the solid and by simple diffraction laws will produce interference lines when detected on exit of the material. We then combine our knowledge of interference patterns and the atomic arrangement within crystalline solids in order to determine various dimensions of the solid, and ultimately to identify them. This is known as the X-ray diffraction method, which is used in conjunction with Bragg's Law to examine these crystals.
Bragg's Law is given by:
(2)
where n is any non-zero integer
is the wavelength of the incident radiation (m)
d is the distance between adjacent lattice planes (m)
and  is the angle of incidence the beam makes with the crystal planes (rad)
Figure 4 demonstrates the origin of the Bragg Law in relation to interference. We know that for constructive interference, the pattern we wish to observe, will occur when the path difference between any two beams is in phase by a complete wavelength  (i.e. n). We then relate this to the path difference from Beam A and Beam B as shown below to be 2x = 2d sin
, and therefore diffraction lines will occur at these  angles. Combining equations (1) and (2) we can also show:
(3)
This experiment used photographic film to detect x-ray diffraction patterns produced when x-rays of a known wavelength were incident on different crystals. The angles of diffraction were measured and indexed suitably according to the miller indices allowed for each cubic type. For convenience (h 2 + k 2 + l 2) was set as N. Consequently, using these last two equations it was possible to determine the type of cubic structure, 'd' and 'a' values for certain crystalline solids, and, based on the three strongest 'd' lines, to identify various chemical compounds.
The fundamental pieces of equipment used in this experiment needed to include a source of
high energy x-rays, a method of detecting and measuring diffraction patterns and various crystal samples to investigate. Therefore, we used a high power X-Ray generator and a Debye-Scherrer camera and photographic film that to the powder diffraction method.
For each part of the experiment the method of loading the camera and irradiating the samples remained the same. Each crystal sample was ground into a very fine powder using a pestle and mortar. The crystals and this equipment were kept inside a warm oven to ensure that no water droplets could contaminate the samples. This powder was then inserted into a very fine capillary tube and gentled filed so that the sample remained compact at the bottom of the tube. The top of this tube was snapped off and it was carefully placed in the centre of the camera (as can be seen in Figures 7a and 7b). The central positioning of the sample was essential to ensure the beam was striking at constant points, which was carried out by placing the camera x-ray in point on a light source and observing the light beam through the x-ray out point. It would them be clear if the capillary tube were central and could be positioned more accurately using the adjuster, if necessary.
Once this alignment was complete, the following procedure was carried out in the absence of light in the dark room to avoid any exposure of the photographic film. The cameras used were of circumference 360mm so for convenience each millimetre on the photographic film would correspond to an angle of one degree. Therefore it was necessary to measure and cut the correct length film to fit well inside the camera and also to punch two holes in the film to allow the insertion of the two collimators for the x-ray in and out beams. This preparation of the film was all performed using a special cutting board and hole punches. The collimators were then removed from the camera and the film was loaded carefully without disturbing the sample, the collimators replaced along with the lid of the camera and the film was tightened using the other adjustment switch. It was good practice to lay out all equipment necessary in the darkroom before the lights were extinguished as to avoid upsetting any apparatus.
The loaded camera was then placed in the x-ray generator set, with the x-ray in hole carefully concealed in transport so no light exposed the film. As all results were to be taken from this film exposure it was of priority that no radiation was able to enter the camera other than the x-rays. Various locks and screws held the camera in place within the x-ray set and a motor was attached onto the rotating table where the sample was mounted. This meant that the sample slowly rotated in the x-ray beam to give many collisions between the rays and the powder and hence to produce strong accurate lines on the film. The set was operated carefully according to safety regulations, and slowly set to a working voltage of 40kV and current of 17mA and left on a timer to irradiate the camera for four hours. After this time had elapsed the machines was switched off and the camera removed, once again concealing the x-ray in hole against light. The camera was returned to the dark room, the film removed and developed. This was done using developer of dilution 1:10 with water for roughly one minute, agitated, and the fixer of dilution 1:3 for roughly 6 minutes. The strip of film was then washed and hung to dry and we expected to see a pattern on the film similar to that of Figure 6, but in our case there would be two holes with the diffraction circles centred around them.
A light box and vernier scale was then used to record the distances in mm between corresponding lines. It was more accurate to measure between two matching lines that between one line and the centre of the hole as this always introduced discrepancy. This gave us our 4 values in degrees and hence we could determine our  values from the origin O. Figure 9 shows a more detailed schematic of the angle we wish to find. Further care needed to be taken when examining the higher angle lines, remembering the dimensions of  and the point the angle was being taken about.
For some idea of experimental error, we would measure at the extremities of each line through the most vertical point as many lines were quite thick and hence has a large error in their position. From this we noted the maximum and minimum 4 figures for each pair of lines and hence determined an error in this, , and later in our 'd' and 'a' values we wished to find.