Since the invention of particle accelerators in the 1930s, scientists have continuously upgraded their design and performance to increase the energy yields achievable.
In doing so, we have been able to experiment thoroughly with atoms, and explore the fundamental structure of matter, in the world around us.
This field of high-energy physics has been one of the most successful as can be seen by its advanced development, which is still ongoing today.
The main requirement for any such apparatus to be deemed an accelerator is that it will increase the energy of the charged particles that are inputted into it. The most simple method of doing this is by accelerating ions of charge The particles then emerge from the accelerator with increased kinetic energy ie. with greater velocity, mass or both.
The next improvement to be made to accelerator design was hence to escape the resonance idea and to account for these higher energy and speed situations where relativity had an effect. This development, that would yield a more concentrated particle beam, came with the Principle of Phase Stability. This idea depended upon adjusting the frequency of the voltage supply to ensure that each time a particle was accelerated it would arrive at the e.m. wave at the right time, with the right energy, and the right 'synchronous' phase.
 Ideally we wish for the frequency to change in such a way that the particle always arrives at the accelerating gap at the right time so that it meets the voltage wave in the first (positive and increasing) quarter of its sine cycle. The path However, if the particle arrives a little early at point It then travels slower, and next time arrives at We can also see that if a particle arrives on a decelerating voltage, for example at
This method of automatic regulation ensures that the particles, if they arrive in roughly the right voltage region, will oscillate around this synchronous phase as a phase stable group of particles. Now, only the correctly stable and energetic particles will emerge in the beam in phase, as opposed to earlier designs that often had particles arriving randomly with different energies. This then allows us to obtain even higher energies of up to hundreds and thousands of MeV.
By the 1950s it was estimated that to increase the energy yield of our synchrotrons tenfold we would need over 100 times more steel, roughly 200,000 tonnes, to focus the beam using conventional electromagnets and cavities. Instead, we developed the idea of simply alternating the orientation of these 'c' shaped magnets that surround the synchrotron torus (
By alternating the gradient of the magnets into successive focusing and defocusing sections we act on the particle trajectory, as lenses would to light. Before this method, we were only extracting a fraction of our weak phase stable beams as the ion paths deviated horizontally and vertically due to asymmetries in the magnetic field and particle alignments (
This simple reversal of the orientation of the magnets meant we only needed twice as much steel and were now reaching energies between 75GeV and 1TeV (based on size and power input).
Since the voltage multipliers in the 1930s there has not been a single instance in which, when a scientist has attempted to gain higher energy particles, he has not succeeded. This is one of the main reasons that the fascination with these 'atom smashers' has persisted. The resonance accelerators overcame the problems of insulation as first encountered by direct voltage generators, and the principle of phase stability was later able to account for relativistic effects. Finally the A.G. synchrotrons abolished all physical limits and now we are technically unstoppable!
So what was it all for? Once the field of particle accelerator physics had begun, we began to explore the nucleus and its constituents thoroughly through experimentation. We soon found that the smaller particles we had discovered, contained stronger nuclear binding forces and would require even more energies to disintegrate them further. This thirst for higher energies and to learn more about these particles has caused us to constantly modify our accelerators and develop new principles to achieve this.
Before we had the use of these machines, we only knew of the proton, neutron and electron, which were thought to be fundamental at the beginning of the century. Since then we have discovered all the many particles that make up the well-known and often 'accepted' Standard Model for matter. Knowledge of these particles, and often more importantly their interactions, allows us to understand many physical phenomena and everyday occurrences. Current projects include the search for the Higg's Particle that will finally complete and prove the Standard Model, as being undertaken at CERN, Geneva.
The only obstacle that we now face, theoretically, is that of funding. The sheer size and cost of steel, magnets, and power consumption, although greatly reduced by the Alternating Gradient principle, has now become far too much for one country and it's government to fund alone. This is why the CERN project in Geneva, which is jointly owned by 13 European countries, is so successful and versatile. CERN is home to all types of accelerator (