The 'Drude' and 'Sommerfeld' free electron models were evaluated using solid state simulations [1] of these theories. The simulations were validated against the theories and subsequently used to probe the accuracy of the models with regards to fundamental laws. The Drude model was found to obey Ohm's law, and both were shown to model the Hall Effect accurately for most metals but not for those with positive mobile charge carriers. This discrepancy was again shown in the Drude model by investigating cyclotron resonance, which was only allowed for left circularly or elliptically polarised fields in the model, when in fact certain metals can exhibit resonance in the opposite direction. It was shown that average drift velocity remains the same in a constant E x field and under Hall Effect conditions with the equal E x for both models. Sommerfeld and Drude both failed to account for the magnetoresistive properties of metals in this instance.
The Drude and Sommerfeld free electron models are two of the earliest ever of their kind, having been devised shortly after the discovery of the electron in 1897. Whilst both models do not fully describe free electrons in metals, they are suitably accurate and useful in certain scenarios where a more accurate theory might only add unnecessary complications.
While the simulations provide convenient visualisation of the Drude and Sommerfeld models, the limitation to 255 electrons means that accurate numerical values cannot be retrieved without applying large fields that slow down computing and data acquisition. This is largely because thermal noise is relatively large making values hard to retrieve accurately. A major pitfall of the Drude simulation is that shown in section 2.1.4 the independence of  and temperature in the simulation. Although the model does not consider collisions to be with lattice ions, it would be far more suitable or the collision frequency related variable to be  which is a constant for a given system.
The classical "Drude" model and the equivalent "Sommerfeld" (without scattering effects) prove well the linear dependence of the macroscopic Ohm's Law, although the addition of the Exclusion Principle in the quantum picture distorts this slightly. Although the elastic and inelastic scattering introduced by "Sommerfeld" fails in this are, it generally increases the accuracy of the Free Electron Model in metals. The cooling effects of inelastic scattering, and the lack of this cooling in the case of elastic scattering helps to provide a better picture of electron collisions with lattice ions, but still lacks consideration of impurities and other vibrations that occur in real metals.
For the cases of combined electric and magnetic fields, the simple relationship explanation of the Hall Angle is approached ideally in both models, due to the simple geometry considered. But Both Drude and Sommerfeld fail to account for the existence of positive charge carriers in certain metals and hence magnetoresistance, and leading to only certain polarisations of fields allowed when later considering the cyclotron frequency.
The Drude and Sommerfeld simulations fall short of imitating the behaviour of real electrons within metals for a number of the investigations carried out during this experiment. The fact that "Drude" is based upon entirely classical principles almost guarantees its failure in areas that have already been proven with deeper quantum exploration. As "Sommerfeld" attempts to take some of the most basic quantum ideas into account it ultimately improves the model, despite using the same unrealistic parameters.