In negotiating the post-war political landscape of Eastern Europe, the western powers revealed an ambiguous attitude. Although historians still disagree on whether diplomatic misunderstandings between the allies of the east and west eventually caused the emergence of a cold war, or whether a gradual loss of influence in Eastern European countries was the reason for its outbreak, the half-hearted commitment to their self-proclaimed defense of liberal democratic principles such as democracy and regional stability prompted disillusioned contemporaries to see the allied settlement of Eastern Europe as again one of unprincipled compromise and appeasement. As former Polish Prime Minister in exile Mikoajczyk wrote a few years later: 'we were sacrificed by our allies, the United States and Great Britain'.
Nonetheless, the United States had full intentions to prevent the re-emergence of any great power on the European continent. The reasons for the western allies' failure to prevent the communisation of Eastern Europe must be sought in the complex and antagonistic diplomatic relations between the two camps of the grand alliance. Whereas the Soviets mistrusted Anglo-American intentions, Roosevelt believed until the end in the possibility of a peaceful settlement with regard to Soviet claims to "national security" in Eastern Europe. By pursuing this policy, Roosevelt downplayed the ideological difficulties underlying the matter. Optimistically, he believed in the compatibility of free and democratic elections in the Soviet Union's neighbouring states, and the natural emergence of 'governments which would maintain friendly relations with the Soviet Union'. The incompatibility of these two principles caused the Americans to deal with the ideological justification of a possible settlement in somewhat abstract terms, believing a favourable outcome would eventually justify such agreements as the Declaration on Liberated Europe made with the Soviets. Roosevelt's underestimation of Soviet expansionism ultimately rendered an agreement on Poland made at the Yalta conference 'so elastic that the Russians can stretch it all the way from Yalta to Washington without technically breaking it'.
Britain, too, found itself in a difficult moral position between its mid-war pledges to the Polish government that '"His Majesty's Government do not recognize any territorial changes which have been effected in Poland since August, 1939"', and the maintenance of allied unity, which eventually involved some concessions to the Soviet Union as to territorial and political claims in Poland. The Soviet's insistence on territorial expansion in East Prussia, Bessarabia, northern Bukovina and Ruthenia, besides the incorporation of eastern Poland up to the Curzon line were thereafter verified at Yalta in February 1945 and at Potsdam in July of that year. Most likely, Churcill's infamous percentages deal with Stalin in October 1944 only reaffirmed Stalin's conviction that he was allowed a free hand in Eastern European territories based merely on unprincipled Realpolitik. However, opposition to these concessions grew. Mikoajczyk, who had all along protested 'that we were only asking for a return to the prewar status quo' resigned, while in the United States Senator Arthur Vandenberg, in 1945, 'looked at the Soviet Union through the lens of Poland and did not like what he saw'. Thus, the Soviet Union and the western powers gradually maneuvered into a bipolar power structure.
Despite the apparently systematic usurpation of power in Eastern European countries by the Soviet Union, it must be borne in mind that Stalin hardly foresaw the full course of events. Often, he acted upon situations as he was confronted with them. It has, therefore, been argued that 'Stalinisation was a process, not a plan'. Intrinsically mistrustful, Stalin concealed much of his intentions, convincing the Americans for a long time that the Soviet Union subscribed to a free, unified Europe. The disparities between open and concealed policy at times took immense and grotesque proportions. Hence, when the Nazis, in 1943, unveiled a mass grave of 15,000 Polish officers at Katyn, murdered upon Stalin's orders, he denied all allegation and seized the opportunity to break diplomatic relations with the Polish government-in-exile upon inquiries from President Sikorski. Moreover, the Soviet-sponsored Polish provisional government in Lublin was ordered to break its links with the loyalist Polish underground Home Army (AK).
Acting from a conviction that any liberated territory immediately became of concern solely for the liberating nation, Moscow eventually resorted to unilateral action to reinforce its sphere of influence. However, '[t]he brutality and cynicism with which [Stalin] handled these matters did more than anything to exhaust the goodwill the Soviet war effort had accumulated in the West'. The replacement of the Radescu government in Romania by the Soviet-supported, communist Groza government, but more strongly, ongoing practices to consolidate Soviet power in Poland in the beginning of 1945 appeared 'to London and Washington deliberately to violate the Yalta agreement'. Cynicism about the possibility of a settlement with Moscow eventually caused the alliance to break before the end the war.
Stalin's interpretation of 'governmental authorities broadly representative of all democratic elements' was, from the western viewpoint, indeed a curious one. Toward the end of the war, Moscow, defying the "London Poles", backed the establishment of a new interim government, while between July 1944 and July 1945, Stalin started to build for Poland 'a security apparatus which was already showing disturbing signs of independence from the Polish government and which was, in fact, effectively controlled by the Soviet 'advisers' within it'.
In the middle of 1944, however, the Lublin claims to governmental supremacy went by no means uncontested. The loyalist Home Army was still Poland's largest organised resistance movement, and Stalin, uncertain about the Lublin committee's loyalty, made a separate agreement with another Polish communist faction based in Moscow, the Polish Committee of National Liberation, which he, according to Mikoajczyk, 'had organised earlier as an instrument of his plans for postwar Poland'. Later that year, the balance of power shifted further in favour of the Soviet Union, by the failing Warsaw uprising, which meant 'the end of the independent Polish left-wing alternative to the Communists'.
With the crushing of 'the leadership of the historic political forces and their military infrastructure' in Poland, communisation now became only a matter of time. In March 1945 the Soviet Union signed a treaty of friendship with Lublin Committee; in the same month a delegation of sixteen prominent politicians, among whom the government delegate of the Polish government in exile, and the commander of the Polish Home Army (Armia Krajowa) were trapped in a meeting and deported to the Soviet Union to face accusations of conspiring against the Red Army.
These developments were signs of the establishment of a Polish interim government existing solely by the grace of the Soviet Union. At this time, however, Poland was still by no means a neatly communised, country, nor was it accepted to be so by the western powers. The post-war political programmes of the Lublin committee and the Polish Committee of National Liberation still revealed rather divergent political agendas. Moreover, despite a domination of Lublin committee ministers in the cabinet, the communists still saw a necessity of including oppositionists in the government. The return to Poland of Mikoajczyk in late 1944 had halted, at least for the time being, an effective total usurpation of the body politic by pro-Soviet communists. Even by 1946, Mikoajczyk's Polish Peasant Party was, with its 600,000 members, Poland's largest political party.
Up to this point, we have primarily looked at the situation in Poland, which, for many western politicians, had become 'the test case of Soviet intentions'. Nevertheless, the communisation of other Eastern European countries happened quite differently, depending on the internal political situation as well as the national state of affairs in the international context at the close of the war. A basis for further negotiation was laid in October 1944 with Churchill's percentages deal with Stalin, in which, among other things, the balance of influence in Yugoslavia was to be divided on a fifty-fifty basis. However, too much has been made of these negotiations. As has been pointed out, in discussions following up on these divisions, British and Soviet foreign ministers Eden and Molotov were unable to reach an eventual agreement which satisfied both demands. As mentioned before, Stalin saw communisation much as a process of opportunities, and in Yugoslavia, the influence of Moscow was 'paramount from the outset'. Paradoxically, however, it was Stalin's caution to avoid alarming the western powers that saw the construction of a compromise government, although on favourable terms for the Yugoslavian communists. In March 1945, an acting regency was agreed, consisting of 'three members, one Croat, one Serb, and one Slovene [who], though non-communists, were all nominees of Tito'. Stalin even managed to convince Churchill to add British support to Tito's provisional government, despite its earlier overt hostilities to 'the English imperialists' back in 1941. The British support helped the Yugoslavian communists to strengthen their power base at the expense of the exile government. With the help of the Red Army, they 'dispersed, disarmed, or forced the exodus of Mihailovi's forces from Serbia', thus gaining access to actual power in the body politic. Moreover, 'the communists, though they might share government [in a coalition], would not share power'. Although it was now 'but a short step to the formalisation of the communist takeover', this meant by no means that this happened firmly under Stalin's direction. The Red Army had retreated from Yugoslavian territory, and Tito, though deferential to Stalin, 'had formed views of his own and had no hesitation in expressing them, even when they contradicted those of Stalin himself'.
The postwar Czechoslovak dealings with the Soviet Union were quite different. Although it has been argued that 'Stalin as well as Roosevelt and Churchill miscalculated when they assumed that there could be friendly states along an expanded Soviet periphery', Czech leader in exile Bene certainly tried, and temporarily managed, to come to some agreement with the Soviet Union. He 'spoke openly of a "Czech solution" that would exchange internal autonomy for Soviet control over foreign and military policy'. Bene was not unjustified in his calculations of the postwar situation in the area. Although Churchill had repeatedly argued for a speeded advance eastwards beyond the western zone of occupation to liberate Prague and prevent Czechoslovakia from falling within the Soviet sphere of influence, general Eisenhower declined, arguing that he 'refused to risk casualties for 'purely political reasons''. Directly upon the liberation of Prague in early May, Soviet interests were secured. The communists within the country were thereafter 'in a strong position for a seizure of power', but Stalin told their leader Gottwald to '"work with Bene, reach an agreement with him, accept him as president."'. Fearing that an immediate communist takeover would only work counterproductively by concentrating anti-communist factions around the democratic person of Bene, they decided to negotiate the terms of a new government on a broader base until the right time would appear to assume power. Bene, from his side, hoped that the inclusion of communist factions in the cabinet would result in a strengthened democratic system, 'with the blessing of the Soviet Union'.
This policy turned out to be only one of buying time. Despite the relative moderateness and tolerance of Gottwald's communists, the Soviet Union continued to press for further advances to communisation. Due to an initial underestimation of Soviet interests in Czechoslovakia by the Americans, the military means of interference were lost when the communists eventually seized power in 1948 without any direct justification.
The various examples of Eastern European reveal a diverse range of political situations in the period running up to May 1945. In the Polish case, Stalin's hopes for a post-war accommodation with the Sikorski government were abandoned already in 1942, while in the Czechoslovak case, Bene' immense popularity prevented the Soviets from bluntly by-passing its exiled government. The Yugoslavian situation was yet different, with a political climate in which the communist party directly and almost naturally dominated the new government. Nonetheless, Tito's power of government was not immediately and unconditionally recognised by Moscow, which is telling of Stalin's opportunism in his efforts to shape Eastern Europe into a system in which communisation dominated.
Meanwhile, goodwill for Soviet intentions in the west gradually deteriorated until the alliance eventually collapsed. A turning point in Soviet diplomacy directed toward the west can be noted around March and April 1945, while an increasing number of American liberals were becoming disenchanted with the Soviet Union and its attitude. After an initial willingness to cooperate, a number of unbridgeable disagreements increasingly turned Soviet-Western relations into an ideological conflict, epitomised by Trumans words to Molotov in their first meeting, 'Carry out your agreements and you won't get talked to like that'.
May 1945 saw the beginnings of a realisation that Soviet unilateral activities in Eastern Europe had to be confronted. However, whilst Stalin had already been active with his communisation plans as territories were being liberated, the Truman administration still resisted the harsher anti-Soviet line held by the British around May 1945. The communisation of Eastern Europe happened step by step; yet most countries, in May 1945, faced a deteriorating, yet not hopeless democratic climate, with strong oppositions counterweighing against communist aspirations. The late recognition and reluctance to take responsibility of the Americans may thus have been the deciding factor in the eventual communisation of the countries in Eastern Europe.