By measuring the specific resistivity over a temperature range of 77 A similar sample of 6% Tin doped Copper was calculated to be 8.48x10 The accepted value for pure Copper is 6.8x10 A similar method was employed to show the band-gap of Germanium to be 0.703 (
Metals and semiconductors have many measurable properties that are useful to take into account when choosing a certain material for a task. There are numerous aspects that cause a particular metal to have a particular property, such as resistivity. If we can discover these aspects and then fit experimental data to the suggested model we can learn a great deal of useful information about that metal. Some of this information is included in what is called "resistivity" which is a measure of how easily electrons can flow within the material. It is equal to:
Where This assumes the wire is of a constant cross-sectional area throughout its length.
High resistivities will mean it is harder for electrons to travel through that material. These are more of an insulator than a material with a lower resistivity. The coefficient of resistivity is a fundamental property of that material, whereas resistance is merely a property of that particular material in that particular environment. Having known values for resistivity of common materials will help engineers to select a material based on its conductiveness so they can best design their project.
Aluminium was used in early days of central-processing-units in computers, and from the 1970s Aluminium/Copper alloy interconnects have been used. Through experiments investigating the resistivities of materials, like this one, it has been shown that Copper is a better conductor than Aluminium and its alloys. As technology advanced and techniques were developed to prevent the Copper poisoning the Silicon by using diffusion layers, its lower resistivity was chosen to replace the reliable Aluminium based interconnects. This is just one example of how resistivities are highly useful in selecting the best material for the job.
In a material there are two factors that contribute to conductivity, the inverse of resistivity. One is the availability of free electrons and the second is the ease of these free electrons to move though the material. These are expressed in the following equation:
Where
In a metal this mobility factor becomes the limiting one, as there are copious free electrons (charge carriers) to not cause any significant impact to the resistivity. The main cause of the lack of mobility is the lattice vibrations of the metal itself. Note these aren't the vibrations of the bonds, which you can visualise by the atoms moving away from and closer to each other in a periodic fashion, but is the lattice moving as a whole, up and down, as the electrons try to 'fly' between the planes.
As temperature decreases these lattice vibrations, known as "phonons" decrease as the metal has less energy. Therefore at 0 However, there are also other features that cause the mobility of the charge carriers to be decreased. Consider a metal that is imperfect, such as it has impurities and defects in the lattice itself. These imperfections will pose obstacles for the electrons, and will appear as residual resistivities at very low temperatures.
These last two mobility effectors are constant with respect to temperature whereas phonons are proportional to temperature, so we can write:
Where
This is known as Matthiesen's Rule.  It is suitable at high temperatures, but at low temperatures the impurity/defect concentration outweighs this and so the graph for Please note that this temperature is less than the boiling point of liquid nitrogen.
Because of this non-linearity it is unjust to extrapolate back to 0 Ignoring this low-temperature non-linearity the graph for resistivity against temperature is linear, with the gradient equal to
As mentioned in (1) resistivity is a combination of factors. If two of the variables are fixed, then by changing the third you can calculate the resistivity for that material. Changing the length or area changes the resistance through that material. This would require multiple samples of the material, and as purity can vary this method is subject to large errors. Also, if only one sample of this material existed it would be impractical to vary area or length. You could of course measure the resistance at varying lengths along the material, but that would be assuming the material is of the same consistent purity throughout.
The method of least errors involves having length and cross-sectional area fixed for each sample. Therefore, we must take resistance of the sample to be our dependant variable and watch how it changes over a range of temperatures. Passing a current through the sample and noting the potential drop across the sample can accomplish the measuring of resistance. This potential drop is caused by energy being used by the electrons to get through the material as it vibrates. Thus we expect more vibration to cause more of a potential drop. Since temperature is proportional to lattice vibration, it is fair to say that higher temperatures cause more of a potential drop across the sample. Resistance, voltage (potential drop) and current are related in Ohm's law, which states:
Where This is true for conductors, and pure semiconductors. Rearranging and eliminating
Where
But from equation (3) we know that Assuming the geometric properties of the material do not change significantly (they will expand slightly but because length and area expand together and they are divided, the actual impact on the constant, This is in agreement with the expected increase of potential drop mentioned above. Therefore, we can write:
Where
It can be seen that if resistivity for a certain temperature is plotted against the voltage for that temperature, then there will be a linear relationship with gradient equal to the temperature coefficient of resistivity multiplied by some constant of that situation. If we were to take into account the geometry and current of the material we could calculate
In semiconductors the behaviour of the conductivity is dominated by the presence of the Band-gap, E
Conductors conduct because their valence electrons are free. This is depicted as an overlap of the valence band and the conduction band so that at least a fraction of the valence electrons can move through the material.
For intrinsic semiconductors like Germanium, the Fermi level is essentially halfway between the valence and conduction bands. Although no conduction occurs at 0 The probability of this is modelled by the equation:
Where
This shows that as temperature rises, conductivity increases - the opposite effect for conductors. This can be thought of higher temperatures giving the electrons in the valence band more energy to jump up into the conduction band. Note that no electrons can occupy the band-gap, they all must be in the bands. Taking the reciprocal of both sides (so the equation for conductivity becomes one for resistivity) and then the natural log, equation (7) becomes:
It can be seen that if the log of resistivity for a certain temperature is plotted against the reciprocal of that temperature, then there will be a linear relationship with gradient equal to the band-gap of the semiconductor divided by two times Boltzmann's constant. The y-intercept of the graph will be Ln|C|, which represents the log of resistivity of the material when at infinite temperature. This is typically a low number for semi-conductors. In theory, the maximum conductivity can be found from this value.
Due to this Seebeck Effect and the need to measure the voltage accurately it is important to account for the thermal emfs in the material. Averaging the potential drops obtained with the current passing in opposite directions will eliminate this error.
Another error that could pose problems is making sure that there is a constant current for all the measurements. As mentioned before the physical attributes of the material will change upon heating, and this could be taken into account but the error would be insignificant compared to the other relatively large errors present.
I used a pure copper wire 0.857 ( It is coiled around an insulator with two ends attached to contact points. Similarly I have a 6% Tin doped Copper wire 0.835 (
As the length and area of the Copper samples were labelled on the experiment and thus I am going to assume that the uncertainty in length is 0.0005 m and in the diameter 0.00005 m.
The 'area over length' was calculated to be 57.28 (
The Germanium semiconductor sample was contained in an open cavity in the same holder that the wires were coiled around. It also had contact points to connect to outside circuitry.
This circuitry consisted of a power supply unit providing a constant 1 Ampere through the samples. The exact current was calculated by using a precise resistor and equation (4), it was set to be 1.000 ( A voltmeter was set up across the precise resistor (as seen in Figure 2) for this purpose.
The potential drop was measured across the samples using separate leads to those supplying the current to reduce errors from the lead resistances. The same leads were used each time the data was collected, also to reduce the random errors. The same voltmeter was used to measure both samples and so the leads were swapped to take the readings.
To eliminate thermal emfs the circuitry also included a reversing switch to swap the polarity of the current, at each temperature two readings (one with forward current and one with reverse) are taken for each sample and then averaged.
The Germanium sample was connected up directly to a digital ohmmeter. The resistance in the leads was negligible compared to the resistance in the semiconductor.
The initial reading was taken at room temperature. The temperature was measured using a thermometer that ranged from - 10
To heat the samples we placed them in a heating bath containing oil due its high boiling point and ease to heat (relatively low specific heat capacity). We then heated the oil for some time, which was around 2 minutes, and waited for the temperature to stabilise before taking the next reading.
The temperature was more or less 20
The oil was agitated with the thermometer whilst heating. When the reading of the thermometer was taken we made sure that the bulb was fully in the oil and not touching anything apart from the oil. If it was near the sides of the insulated vessel there might have been a false reading.
The fact that the vessel was insulated meant that it took a while for the temperature to stabilise at the various intervals so when we incorrectly estimated the heating time and overshot the 20
The range of measurements taken went from 19 The thermometer was accurate to
After the final reading we removed the samples from the oil bath and let them drip oil back into the vessel for an hour. We then dabbed the remaining oil off the samples and submerged them into a Dewar of boiling liquid Nitrogen.
Liquid Nitrogen boils at - 196
All the readings were taken using digital multimeters, for the Copper samples they were set onto the Voltage channel, and for the Germanium it was the Resistance.
As the semiconductor was effectively acting as a thermistor we could tell with more accuracy and reliability when the temperature was levelling off, as the rate of change of resistance would slow down. We had a multimeter set up monitoring the resistance in the Germanium, and another to measure the voltage of the Copper samples in turn.
To minimise errors the measurement of the samples were taken as close to each other as possible, with fast switching of the current reversal switch in addition to the swapping of cables coming from the samples.
When in the oil, and the potential drops across the Copper samples were all in the same order of magnitude, the dial on the multimeter did not have to be adjusted and the error for these results is
For the liquid Nitrogen the potential drop across the pure Copper sample was much smaller than previous results and so the dial was adjusted to gain maximum accuracy. The error for this voltage is
The error in the resistance of the Germanium is
The value of resistance in the Germanium sample was greater than 20 M
To find the average resistance in the Copper samples we had to divide the average voltage by the current. The final error of this resistance is
To get the final resistivity for any given temperature we multiplied the value for the average resistance by the 'area of length' value for that sample. The error involved in this and thus the final error for resistivity is Note this doesn't apply for the liquid Nitrogen readings as the voltage was measured with ten times more accuracy.
See attached figures 3, 4 and 5.
Figure 3 shows a graph of resistivity for pure Copper against temperature on which is plotted 9 experimental results. The gradient of this graph is A linear regression shows that it is equal to:
Figure 4 shows a graph of resistivity for 6% Tin doped Copper against temperature on which is plotted 9 experimental results. The gradient of this graph is A linear regression shows that it is equal to:
Figure 5 is a graph showing the natural log of resistance against 1/temperature. The gradient of this graph is E As shown in equation (8). After multiplying the gradient by 2 By this method the value I obtained for E
General Limitations in the experimental procedure were that the temperature range over which I tested the resistivity was limited. At low temperatures the phonons become the dominant cause of resistivity. It would have been good to find the point where this happens. Also the temperature was still changing whilst the readings were being taken, albeit a small amount the change was still there. A better method would be to have made sure the oil, and consequently the samples, were at exactly the right temperature. However, this would mean the experiment would have taken a longer time to run.
Having a Mercury thermometer with humans reading the values is bound to cause errors. A more precise and accurate method would be to use thermocouples and a computer to record the temperature and resistance. To take this idea further, the computer could record data continuously and plot the graphs on-the-fly as the temperature was increased. Then the time limitations would be eliminated as this could be done overnight and the human errors would be entirely eliminated. However, as the aims of the 1
The human-controlled heater lead to overshooting the required temperature several times. Also, in order for one to measure the temperature there was occasion, when the temperature of the oil was cool and so its volume low, for the thermometer to be removed from the vessel to read the temperature. This would possibly cause the values for the lower temperatures to be shifted left (towards 0 Our best efforts tried to reduce and account for this and we believe that the errors involved were reduced to insignificance.
The y-intercept for the trend line on Figure 3, the pure Copper graph, is - 3 This shows that at absolute zero the metal will have a negative resistivity. This is impossible so there must be an effect below 77 As shown in equation (3) there are residual resistivities present that only show up at very low temperatures when the phonons are insignificant compared to the effect the impurities have. It is these residual resistivities that will prevent the resistivity going negative.
Because of this effect it is meaningless to talk about the y-intercept by extrapolating back data from high temperatures. I would need to conduct further experiments at lower temperatures, less that 50
The y-intercept for Figure 5, the Germanium sample, is at - 1.514. e This represents the resistivity at an infinite temperature. In theory all of the electrons in the valence band have jumped up into the conduction band. This is the lowest resistivity Germanium can have. I think the reason this is not zero is because the phonons in the material will be particularly active at such high temperatures and as shown above, this impedes the electrons and causes a resistance. There is scope here for an addition experiment investigating this and relating it back to band-gap theory.
If I knew the band-gap for Germanium to begin with, I could have calculated what Boltzmann's constant from the gradient of the graph. Assuming E
For the 6% Tin doped Copper graph (Figure 4) I have plotted a second trend line with the point at 77 This gives a better correlation for the straight line - it is a better fit. However in this case the value for resistivity at 77 Before the result differed by only 0.9%. Without the 77 There are negative deviations at low temperature, then positive deviations and then negative again. I do not think that the experiment contained such a significant systematic error since the other sets of data do not show up one. Thus I think it is fair to conclude that the point at 77 There is a possibility of additional physical effects acting at this low temperature. But the phonons would have pushed the point higher, not lower so I do not think that it is the phonons taking the results off the linear trend.
My final result is within the error limits of the accepted value of The value obtained for the band-gap of Germanium was also in the error limits. I was unable to find an accepted value for the 6% Tin doped Copper sample.
The results I have give a good approximation to a straight line and so I feel confident that the theory links well to the experiment.
Overall I feel the results are accurate and capable of supporting firm conclusions from.