-ray spectroscopy has been around since the 1960s and is used in a range of applications. In 1969 two satellites, called Vela 5A and Vela 5B, were launched into Earth orbit with -ray detectors intended to monitor atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons.[1] Substances that emit -rays can be injected into the body to provide radioactive tracing of such functions as blood flow, liver and kidney organs, and bone developments. In positron emission tomography an isotope is injected which emits positrons. Upon striking the normal matter inside the body two -rays are produced in opposite directions, which are detected, and used to pinpoint concentrations of blood.[2]
-ray spectra are needed to help understand high-energy processes in our universe. The energy of a -ray can tell us how the ray was created. Predicting or explaining certain -ray activity can test theories we have about the universe. Thus -ray spectroscopy is a significant area of modern physics.
Electromagnetic radiation with energy greater than 100 KeV is generally referred to as -rays. However, hard X-rays can also have this high energy. The difference is that -rays are photons emitted from nuclei and X-rays are emitted from de-excitation of atomically bound electrons.
-rays interact in matter by three significant and distinct processes; photoelectric absorption, Compton scattering, and pair production.
Pair production occurs in the intense electric field near the protons in the nuclei of the absorbing material.[3] The -ray disappears and an electron and positron are created. A -ray of energy greater than 1.02 MeV is required to create these particles. This type of interaction is seen as peak 2 m
0
c
2 less than the main photopeak.
Compton scattering occurs between the energies greater than several hundred KeV and less than around 5 MeV. The process involves the -ray photon scattering off an electron. The electron is given a forward knock and the photon can be scattered off in any direction. In two dimensions the interaction can be written as momentum conservation equations [4]:
(1)
(2)
Where h is Planck's constant, is original frequency, ' is the new frequency, c is the speed of light in a vacuum, P e is the momentum of the electron.
Solving the equations of momentum conservation in all three dimensions gives the new -ray energy as:
(3)[5]
Where m
0
c
2 is the energy of the electron at rest, and the scattering angle.
The extreme where = means a head-on collision and the photon loses the most energy. This is shown on spectra as the Compton edge. It is an edge since there cannot be any Compton scattering events detected between this energy and the photopeak. The energy of this Compton edge can be found by setting = in equation (3), so for a given initial energy h, the edge is at energy:
(4)
Because the photons can be deflected through all angles from 0 to 180 they can have any energy from zero up to the Compton edge. This produces a continuum on the spectrum.
The original equations (1) and (2) are based on the electron being free. The more likely scenario is that the electron is bound to an atom. In this case the Compton edge will not be so pronounced and will appear rounded off.
The third type of -ray interaction occurs at energies up to several hundred KeV and is called photoelectric absorption. The -ray disappears as its energy is completely given to an electron. This photoelectron is freed from the atom and has the energy of the incident -ray minus the binding energy to free the electron. This binding energy is 33 KeV for the iodine K-shell and so for -rays of several hundred KeV the recoiling electron has most of the energy. As the electrons still bound to the atom rearrange, an X-ray is emitted to conserve energy. In iodine this characteristic X-ray is emitted 88% of the time.[6]
Since the photoelectron carries the energy of the incident -ray it is possible to create a spectrum of -rays by detecting the photoelectrons and measuring their energy.
The oldest method of creating a spectrum is to use a scintillator to convert the -ray into visible light and then a photomultiplier to convert the photon to an electron and amplify the current to a detectable level. This signal is converted from its analogue form into a digital signal that can be interpreted by a multi-channel analyser. This set up is depicted in Figure 1:
Scintillators can be organic or inorganic. Inorganic scintillators have impurities added called "activators". These activators add energy states in the band gap of the scintillator material that an excited electron can access when given energy from the -rays. The excited electron drops down to an activator ground state and releases a photon corresponding to the energy of the incident -ray . Refer to reference [7] for a more complete description outside the scope of this introduction.
The scintillator photons are chosen in the visible range, and as a photon comes in contact with a photocathode the photon's energy is transferred to an electron. This electron then migrates to the surface of the thin photocathode before escaping the surface and going into the electron multiplier. The electron multiplier is a series of dynodes. The dynode material is chosen so that upon absorbing an electron, it reemits more than one electron. This secondary electron emission yield is sensitive on the incident electron energy, and temperature. Finally the electrons are absorbed on an anode and this produces a measurable current that will be proportional to the initial -ray energy. A complete photomultiplier tube is shown in Figure 2:
The output voltage is analogue, and is then digitised. Compared to the time taken for this digitalisation the scintillation, photoelectron emission, multiplication and detection happen quickly. Because the conversion takes longer than the measurement some measurements may be missed. The live-time is the time when the converter is observing the detector for peak voltages and not doing conversions. The difference between the actual time taken for the readings and the live-time as called the dead-time.
The multichannel analyser does this conversion and stores the digital data. They can also perform such functions as adjust the gain, shaping time, pile-up rejection and spectrum stabilisation. These, and other facets of MCAs, are discussed in more detail in reference [8].
The end effect is that the MCA can display a spectrum of energies of the -rays and their respective count rates. A typical spectrum is shown in Figure 3:
The X-ray peak in Figure 3 is caused by the -rays striking material around the detector and through photoelectric absorption an X-ray is given off and detected. For example, -rays that strike the lead shielding of the detector produces 74.96 KeV lead X-rays.
Backscatter peaks occur around 0.2 MeV and are caused by -rays that have been Compton scattered off materials surrounding the detector.
Annihilation peaks are from pair production (discussed above) in the material surrounding the detector and thus occur at 0.511 MeV.
The Compton edge, which theoretically should be a sharp edge, is rounded due to bound electrons having a spread of energies as well as the resolution of the detector. Multiple Compton events are caused by Compton scattering occurring outside the scintillator crystal, such as scattering off the table.
The resolution of the detector is defined to be the full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of the photopeak divided by the central energy of peak, the FWHM is shown in Figure 3. This is related to the relative detector efficiency by the peak-to-total ratio. The counts under the photopeak divided by the total counts detected gives the detector efficiency. The Compton continuum hence decreases detector efficiency.
The probability that a nucleus in a sample will decay and emit a -ray is small and constant for a single nucleus. With many nuclei together the emission is independent, and if the half-life is much greater than the observation time, the emission will be constant too. Because the decay events are independent, random, and spontaneous the Poisson distribution can model the nuclear decay statistics. A binomial distribution would match too, as decay is a constant probability event during the short observation times relative to the half-life, but due to the large numbers of nuclei it is "computationally cumbersome." [9]
Equation (5) gives the equation for the Poisson distribution:
(5)
Which gives the predicted probability of measuring exactly x counts given that the mean is . The predicted variance is equal to this mean, and the predicted standard deviation is equal to the square root of this mean:
(6)
This relation is a satisfactory test for the Poisson distribution. The aims of this experiment are to appreciate the statistical nature of the radioactive decay process and verify that radioactive is governed by Poisson statistics.
During this the aim is to learn how to collect and interpret -ray spectra, to understand the practical difficulties involved in obtaining -ray spectra and in particular the effects introduced by the detector. Obtaining the -ray spectrum for a known source and explaining all the features contained in the data will objectify this.
Identifying unknown -ray sources from their spectra will be performed along with an investigation of the energy dependence of -ray attenuation coefficients of lead, which will involve the measuring of the -ray attenuation of lead.
Calibration relates the channel numbers of the multichannel analyser with actual energies. Without calibration the real energies of the -rays would be unknown. However ratios such as detector efficiency would still be the same.
The equipment used to detect -rays in this experiment is of the same kind as describes in Figure 1. The microprocessor is in a PC and scintillator is sodium-iodide crystal doped with thallium (NaI(Tl)).
Sources of -rays were placed in the detector close to the scintillator crystal, as -rays are emitted in all directions the inverse-square law applies and so the closer the source and detector the more counts will be detected. These sources were 137Cs and 241Am, which have energies of 661 KeV and 59.5 KeV respectively.
The software on PC was used to reset any spectrum currently displayed and then start recording data until the spectral peaks were clear, that is, until the signal-to-noise ratio was high enough to accurately place the energy photopeaks of the sources in a definite channel.
The channel number the respective peaks were in were defined as having the energies stated above exactly. The MCA then uses a linear equation to define the energies of all the other channels.
Because the way the calibration is carried out systematic errors are likely to occur. Firstly if the temperature of the apparatus changes after calibration the detected energies will appear different. Secondly the MCA might not be linear and so only making two exact measurements would just be a linear approximation.
By calibrating the device it allows unknown photopeaks to be measured and thus can aid in the identification of unknown emission sources, which is part of the objectives of the experiment.
Having the apparatus at a fixed temperature or having a temperature correction function would prevent the calibration drifting away from true as the local temperature varies. Having more sources of known photopeak energy would enable a non-linear calibration to be made, if the MCA is not linear.