Ultrasound is the range of acoustic frequencies above the range audible to the human ear, or above approximately 20,000 Hertz. Ultrasound is used commercially as a method of non-destructive testing. It can be used to determine object thickness, detect cracks, and ascertain various properties of the materials being tested.
The range of uses for ultrasound makes ultrasonics an important area for research.
Ultrasound is used medically for such activities as prenatal scans and can measure blood flow using the Doppler shift of the ultrasound waves.
Today it is possible to place a component for testing in a tank of water (used as an ultrasonic couplant since air attenuates the signal greatly) and computer controlled robotic arms with transducers will scan the object, feeding the data into a computer for evaluation.
The University of  ultrasonics group [1] has research areas in thickness gauging, weld and bond inspection to name a few. They use laser ultrasound, plasma ultrasound, EMATs and piezoelectric transducers, which this report will focus on.
Since all material is comprised of atoms, and in a solid these atoms are held in equilibrium by internal electrostatic forces, it is possible to produce a mechanical wave in the object. The atoms will move together and if the material is not forced beyond its elastic limits then the atoms will return to their equilibrium position.
The inertia of the atoms and the electrostatic restoring force causes oscillatory motion to be established in the object. In solids, acoustic waves have three main methods of propagation; longitudinal, shear, and surface.
Longitudinal waves have oscillatory motion in the direction of propagation. They consist of areas of higher density (compression) followed by lower density (rarefaction) and are sometimes called compressional waves.
Shear waves have oscillatory motion perpendicular to the direction of propagation and are also called transverse waves. They require an acoustically solid material and consequently are greatly attenuated in liquids and gases. They are usually created from the energy of a longitudinal wave and so are comparatively weak.
Surface waves, or Rayleigh waves, propagate along surface of the object and the energy of the wave is exponentially diminished the further down into the material the wave gets. Most of the energy is contained within a layer with depth equal to the wavelength of the surface wave. The particle movement is elliptical in fashion. This type of wave follows the surface closely and so is useful for inspecting areas that other waves could not reach so easily.
Other wave modes are possible in solids that go beyond the scope of this introduction and so are not mentioned here.
The wavelength of the ultrasound is critical for the detection of flaws in a material. The "sensitivity" of the apparatus is the capability to detect a small flaw whereas the "resolution" is the capability to discern flaws close together or near the surface of the object. Both increase when wavelength decreases. However, as wavelength decreases it becomes more liable to scatter and so the penetration of ultrasound into the object is reduced. Consequently it is hard to have an ultrasound beam that can resolve fine detail deep into an object.
Other variables that can affect flaw detection include the diameter of the transducer, the voltage given to the crystal, and the type of crystal used.
Ideally the ultrasonic energy would only be reduced by the spreading of the sound wave but in real solids scattering and absorption also occurs. Attenuation is the combined effects of these phenomena and is expressed as:
(1)
Where A0 is the amplitude at the initial location, A is the attenuated amplitude at a distance z from the initial location  is Nepers per length.
Nepers is a dimensionless quantity like decibels. 1 dB is 0.1151 Np. They are both related to the ratio of intensity (or sound pressure squared) the difference being decibels take the base-10 log and Nepers takes the natural log.
(2)
As ultrasound is a wave it experiences refraction at the interface between two materials of different densities. Snell's Law governs this behaviour at a planar interface.
(3a)
(3b)
In the case where the longitudinal wave passes into a denser medium it is possible for the refracted angle to equal 90. This is the first critical angle and produces a surface acoustic wave (SAW) called a creep wave. These have a longer wavelength than Rayleigh waves but as they are of an inhomogeneous nature and decay rapidly they are not as useful as Rayleigh waves.
When a wave encounters an medium with different acoustic impedance and a non-perpendicular incidence angle something called "mode conversion" occurs. A longitudinal wave hitting another material will produce a shear wave. As shear waves move with a velocity less than that of the longitudinal wave then according to Snell's Law the refraction angle will be less than the refraction angle for the longitudinal wave (see Figure 4).
The second critical angle is found by increasing the incident angle past the first critical angle to where the refracted shear wave angle becomes 90. This produces a shear creep wave that moves along the interface.
Adjusting the incidence angle to slightly beyond the second critical angle causes the Rayleigh surface waves to be generated. These travel slower than shear waves, which in turn travel slower than longitudinal waves.
The foundation for ultrasound production is in the piezoelectric transducers and their property of being able to convert electrical signals into mechanic vibration and vice versa. The crystal is a polarised material, with some parts positive and some negative, and it has electrodes attached to opposite sides. When an electric field is applied across the electrodes the crystal undergoes electrostriction whereby its dimensions are changed. In some crystals, such as Quartz, which are permanently polarised, a force changing the dimensions causes an electric field so the effect can work both ways. This is called the piezoelectric effect.
In the 1950's the piezoelectric effect was discovered in ceramics, by 1960 lead zirconate titanate compositions were being widely used. These ceramic acoustic transducers have the advantages of being produced in a variety of shapes to produce different wave modes, operating at a lower voltage and usable up to 300C.
The vibrating piezoelectric element produces ultrasound with a wavelength of twice its thickness. The main reason high resolution transducers cannot be produced is because the element required would be very thin and delicate.
To get maximum energy the matching layer will be of the same acoustic impedance to the piezoelectric element and will have a thickness of a quarter wavelength. This keeps the reflected waves inside the matching layer in phase since the wave will have to travel twice the quarter wavelength.
The wear plate simple protects the matching layer from getting scratched. The backing material has a large affect on the overall damping properties of the transducer. Similar impedance to the element will produce maximal damping causing a narrow bandwidth and high sensitivity.
There are many forms of contact transducer but the ones that concern us here are the direct-contact sort and the wedge sort. The wedge transducer is carefully designed to cut out most of the longitudinal wave energy and only transmit the shear wave into the material in order to generate surface waves.
Ultrasound can be successfully used to determine a variety of different properties of materials. Velocities of sound, bulk/shear/Young's moduli, Poisson's ratio, densities, and more can all be determined using ultrasonic techniques. The limitation of using couplant and contact transducers in these experiments is understandable, however a better situation for finding out the properties of materials ascertained in the experiments above would be to use EMATs and have the data collected by a computer. The flexibility offered by being able to view the data as different scans (mentioned above are the A and C scans) depending on the scenario would be valuable as well.
Overall the experiments were accurate and where discrepancy arose it was followed with a suggested reason for the inaccuracy. The theoretical basis for the experiments was sound along with the experimental procedure carried out. Thus the results concluded are mostly strong, repeatable and reliable.