Crossed fields are examined leading to the Hall effect and the Hall angle. The experimental results agree with the theoretical prediction for the Hall angle in the case of negative charge carriers. However, the Drude model was shown to fail in high valence systems. Magnetoresistance was derived but not found in the Drude or Sommerfeld models. Cyclotron frequency was investigated and a resonance relation found dependant on the magnetic field. A relation for the phase shift between the electric field and velocity between beats was found to be It was also found that scattering prevents resonance from building up for sufficiently low .
Today we are aware that the distribution of electron speeds is governed by quantum factors, and our models relating to free electron theory will therefore incorporate them. There are classical models, however, which predate Fermi-Dirac statistics and still give good accounts of many aspects of the behaviour of electrons in metals. These non-quantum models are based on the Maxwell-Boltzmann velocity distribution.
One such classical model is the Drude model, which is employed in this investigation. For comparison, the Sommerfeld model will also be considered; the Sommerfeld model was an early free electron model which applied quantum mechanical concepts. This model uses Fermi-Dirac rather than Maxwell-Boltzmann statistics, though in other respects it shares similarities with the Drude version.
These experiments utilised a computer simulation program 'drude' which encodes the concepts of the Drude model. The program allows for electric field (x and y components of), magnetic field (z component of), scattering time, temperature, and AC field frequency to be varied according to the requirements of the experiment.
The program displays the electron activity in real and velocity space, and is capable of plotting this behaviour on position-time and velocity-time graphs.
For comparative purposes, another program, 'sommer', was also considered. This simulation incorporates the concepts of the Sommerfeld model.
As discussed in 2.4, the Hall angle can be calculated via the x-direction and y-direction drift velocities. The theory predicts that will vary with the magnetic field and with scattering time (see equation 5).
The Drude model simulation was run a number of times with varying values of magnetic field B The component drift velocities were obtained from the gradients of the resulting position space graphs (of mean position against time). In each instance, the simulation was left to run for a sufficient period for the position space graph lines to approximate straight lines, for accurate measurement of gradients.
E A 1000 picosecond simulation was run, and a graph plotted of mean position against time, from which the gradient can be taken and used to calculate the mean velocity of the electrons in the system. The simulation was run with one, two and three electrons in the system, to represent valence atoms. Using equations (6) and (7),
It can be seen from table 1 that the simulated data for elements with a valence of one or two agrees closely with data obtained from experiment. For elements with a valence of three however, there is a discrepancy: The experimental data shows these elements to have a positive Hall coefficient, whereas the simulation gives a negative coefficient. One explanation for this would be if the charge carriers were positive, and hence the Hall field in the positive y direction. It is now known that charge carriers are sometimes 'holes' - absences of electrons. These are a phenomenon that require quantum theory to explain, and so are not accounted for by the Drude model.
The main improvement of the Sommerfeld model on the Drude model is the addition of the exclusion principle. Although the Sommerfeld model does take some quantum effects into account, it still makes no allowance for positive charge carriers (holes) and therefore does not solve this problem.
It has been observed that elements with greater numbers of non-conduction electrons obey this relationship less well, since the Drude model does not take account of what type of scattering is taking place. Since the model does not take this into account, it is not possible to replicate the effect in the simulation.
In the Drude simulation it is possible to choose a value for the y-component of the electric field to give zero drift velocity in the y-direction. See figure 7.
Setting the experimental parameters as E Turning off the magnetic field and the y-component of the E field gives drift velocity to be 0.0905 m/s. The similarity of the drift velocities shows that the Drude model does not account for the increased resistance due to a magnetic field.
Because the Drude model neglects electron-electron interaction then it is not possible for electrons to form a backlog in the material, slowing the approaching electrons and manifesting as a resistance.
As the Sommerfeld model also neglects electron-electron interaction it too falsely predicts zero magnetoresistance. If such interactions were to be taken into account then it would be found that the resistance of material would depend on the magnetic field as well as the temperature. The complexity of the electron motion in a magnetic field leads us to expect a certain amount of resistance.
In crossed electric and magnetic fields charged particles, such as electrons, follow circular trajectories in real space and also velocity space. The rate of change in this velocity space has a constant angular frequency, known as the cyclotron frequency.
In conclusion, the classical Drude model suffers from some limitations, but if applied in the appropriate cases can be quite useful for predicting the behaviour of free electrons. The Sommerfeld model addresses some of the problems of the earlier model by including the Pauli exclusion principle: it gives a better account of thermal and electrical conductivity. In this investigation, however, the Sommerfeld model does not have a great advantage over the Drude model, since they both encounter problems regarding the Hall effect and magnetoresistance.
The Hall angles predicted by theory and those obtained from the Drude model simulation agreed to within estimated error. The shortcoming here is that since the Drude model is only equipped to deal with negative charge carriers (that is, electrons), it cannot consider the Hall angles obtained with positive charge carriers (that is, holes). In the case of holes, the sign of the Hall angle would be reversed; there is no allowance for this in the Drude model.
For metallic atoms with valences of 1 or 2, the model simulation gave accurate (to within estimated errors) Hall coefficients. However, for valences of 3, it gave Hall coefficients with the wrong sign. This is again due to the inability of the Drude model to take into account positive charge carriers.
The Drude model gives no account of magnetoresistance, as it neglects electron-electron interactions. The Sommerfeld model similarly neglects these interactions, and so does not provide a suitable solution. Cyclotron frequency is shown by the model to be proportional to the applied magnetic field. If the frequency of the external AC electric field is varied, then cyclotron resonance can be obtained.
The Drude model is therefore a simple and convenient one if applied with restrictions; these restrictions are formulated with an awareness of the shortcomings of the model, as discussed above. The cases where the Drude model (and the Sommerfeld model) cannot be applied, as in investigations into magnetoresistance, for example, must be approached with different, perhaps more elaborate, models: models which take into account the various effects which are neglected in the Drude and Sommerfeld approaches.