The Michelson interferometer was calibrated with a helium-neon laser. Interference fringes were studied with sodium, mercury and white light sources. Coherent laser light was passed through air, CO 2, He, N 2, and Ar gases and the refractive indices were found to be 1.000265, 1.000398, 1.000032, 1.000272, and 1.000259 respectively, which are in agreement with accepted values. The 'frequency gap' between doublet frequencies in sodium lamp light was found to be 5.104x10 11 
0.059x10 11 Hz compared to an accepted value of 5.154 x10 11 Hz. The coherence length of white light was found to be 3 which is in conflict with the accepted value of 1.6. The coherence length of mercury lamp light was found to be unobtainable with this experimental arrangement.
Optical interference is the effect of the superposition of two coherent light waves. This interference can be constructive, when the amplitudes of the waves add in phase, or destructive, when their amplitudes add out of phase. Interferometers allow the intensity (related to the square of the amplitude) of this light to be observed. This allows us to study properties of the light, as well as exploiting this behaviour to study other things. The most famous example is arguably the use of the Michelson interferometer to refute the existence of the ether (the Michelson-Morley experiment). Interferometry can be put to a variety of uses, notably the accurate measurement of small lengths, and small angles. Other uses include inspection of semiconductor wafers, high resolution spectroscopy and measurement of stellar angular diameter, the cosmic microwave background spectrum, vibrations in buildings and geodetic standard baseline measurements.
There are two main ways in which interferometers operate: firstly, those based on the lateral division of wave fronts using mirrors or diaphragms; secondly, those based on division of amplitude, which divide the waves by partial reflection, giving rise to two wave fronts with the same wavelength, but having reduced amplitude. The Michelson interferometer is an example of the latter type.
In the course of this investigation, the Michelson interferometer was used firstly to determine the frequencies of the sodium doublet, and the coherence lengths of white light and light from a mercury lamp. Secondly, the interferometer was used to determine the refractive indices of various gases, by altering the optical path lengths via changing the gas pressure.
Since the proper functioning of the apparatus relies on the components being precisely aligned, it is sensitive to vibrations, and as such is disturbed by people walking past or coughing in close proximity. Perturbation of the apparatus could result in the light not falling on the detector, and hence a perceived drop in intensity where none existed.
Whilst care was taken to maximise the visibility, it cannot be assumed that it was achieved in all cases. The distance of the photodiode from the outside of its housing was unknown, making it difficult to focus the light onto it, so the maximum possible intensity might not fall on the detector. The gain on the photodiode was also adjusted to increase the intensity that was detected. Increasing the gain helped until the photodiode became saturated.
It has been assumed throughout that the motion of the mirror was smooth. The motor and band attached to it however did slip occasionally, which would result in a lack of smooth movement of the mirror. As the software recorded intensity against time and not distance travelled by the mirror, it is possible that the fringes would appear stretched as a result.
The measured intensity would also be affected by the unavoidable presence of light from sources external to the experiment, even though steps were taken to eliminate these. Ideally there would be no light sources other than those under investigation present.
The laser is the ideal for calibration as the long coherence length of laser light means that fringes will be observed throughout the whole length of the mirror's range. This means calibration of the mirrors could be performed without having to find the zero path difference first, as sodium light, say, would only exhibit the fringes around this point.
The relatively short arm lengths and distance to the detector are useful for observation of sodium light. Whilst longer arms would have little effect on laser light, the increased distance would mean more sodium light is lost through divergence and absorption as it is a point source. Because less light reaches the detector the visibility is lowered. To determine the coherence length of mercury light, the mirror would have to be able to move over a greater distance than is allowed by this apparatus.
Overall the results obtained are sufficient to support the conclusions reached as the experiment is as accurate as feasibly possible.