Ten glasses of nominal composition xLi 2O(100-x)B 2O 3 were prepared over the range x = 0 to 40 mol%. A boron-11 NMR investigation has provided the fraction of 4-coordinated boron in the samples and this is consistent with previous studies. Raman spectra showed the intermediate range order associated with this type of binary borate glass. Superstructural units were assigned to the Raman peaks and this provided the fraction of 4-coordinated boron in the samples. The fraction of 4-coordinated boron given by Raman spectroscopy was compared to that given by NMR spectroscopy and a correlation of N4 Raman = 0.87 (0.18) N4 NMR + 0.035 ( 0.056) was found. Six glasses of nominal composition xCoO(20-x)Li 2O80B 2O 3 were prepared over the range x = 0.1 to 5 mol%. It is shown that accurate determination of N4 fraction in glasses from boron-11 NMR spectra is unattainable for samples containing 2 mol% cobalt oxide or greater.
Borate glasses have been well studied over the past decade and there has been much research into their structure and spectra. This interest is partly because of the anomalous behaviour of the glass in that it forms superstructural units: well defined arrangements of the basic BO 3 and BO 4 structures (Fig. 1) [1]. BO 3 forms a planar triangle whereas BO 4 has a tetrahedral arrangement of oxygen around the boron atom.
Borates participate in the formation of borosilicate glasses that are used to immobilise high level nuclear waste for long-term storage. The existence of superstructural units in these glasses could have important consequences on the final structure of the nuclear waste glass, so it is worthwhile investigating the superstructural groups of simpler binary borate glasses. Evidence for the existence of the intermediate range order in borates, which does not occur in other glasses, are the sharp lines witnessed in Raman spectra corresponding to the breathing mode of the boroxol, and triborate, groups [2,3].
Pure B 2O 3 forms a glass by itself and forms binary borates with many oxides. While pure B 2O 3 only consists of 3-coordinated 'B3' boron at standard pressure, the addition of cations makes boron structures containing 'B4' possible. This is basically because it is more energetically favourable to form BO 4 tetrahedra than break B-O-B bridges and leave a non-bridging oxygen. This is discussed in detail by Wright, Vedishcheva and Shakhmatkin [1]. This special behaviour gives borate glasses the ability to form superstructural units, some of which are shown in figure 1.
An interesting parameter of borate glasses is the N4 fraction, which is the amount of 4-coordinated boron compared to the total amount of boron:
(1)
Hence, pure B 2O 3 has an N4 fraction of zero and a hypothetical borate glass consisting of nothing but diborate units would have an N4 fraction of 50%. The proportion of 4-coordinated boron is detectable by, amongst other means, Raman spectroscopy and Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. The most extensive study on lithium borates was performed by Jellison, Feller and Bray in 1978 [4]. They showed the N4 fraction peaking at around 40 mol% Li 2O with a proportion of approximately 0.45 B4 to 0.55 B3.
A primary aim of this project is to correlate the N4 fraction given by NMR spectroscopy to that given by Raman spectroscopy. This is worthwhile as various radioactive elements that would be present in the nuclear waste glass, such as uranium and its oxides, are paramagnetic, which prevents NMR spectroscopy being performed when these species are in high abundance. However, Raman spectroscopy does not depend on the magnetic susceptibility of the sample. By correlating the two techniques the N4 fraction can be found from the Raman spectrum of a glass containing too much paramagnetism to be analysed with NMR. Although Raman scattering produces a spectrum unaffected by magnetisation of the sample, the spectrum is significantly harder to interpret in terms of N4 fraction than an NMR spectrum.
One of the seminal papers in the field of Raman spectroscopy of borate glasses is by Konijnendijk and Stevels (1975), and offers insight into which peaks correspond to which superstructural units in borate glasses [5]. Another key study into superstructural unit peak assignment was performed by Kamitsos, Karakassides and Chryssikos (1989), in which they concentrated on caesium, rubidium and potassium binary borates [6]. Meera and Ramakrishna also contributed to the peak assignment debate in 1991 discussing a wide range of borate glasses [2].
Densities and structural models for various alkali borates, including lithium and caesium, were investigated by Royle et al. [7]. Neutron diffraction studies of caesium borate glasses performed by Shaw et al. have provided further information about the role of superstructural units in vitreous B 2O 3 and borate glasses [8]. Massot, Souto and Balkanski have tested borate glasses with Raman and light scattering spectroscopy as well as acoustic wave velocity and glass density measurements to help describe the short and medium range order [9].
NMR spectroscopy is very useful in the study of borate glasses as it can clearly distinguish between the two chemically distinct B3 and B4 sites and quantify the proportion of each. In 1993 Wllen and Mller-Warmuth showed that magic-angle-spinning (MAS) NMR was a reliable method to do this in both theory and experiment [10]. However, as boron-11 is a quadrupolar species, this single-quantum method contained second order anisotropies. Amoureux, Fernandez and Frydman showed how to optimise an earlier multiple quantum experiment on half-integer quadrupoles that would remove these anisotropies [11]. This led to a study of the short range order in B 2O 3 by Hwang et al. [12]. A helpful communication on the theory of multiple-quantum magic-angle spinning (MQMAS) containing further optimisation methods is provided by Brown and Wimperis [13].
Using 3QMAS-NMR Stebbins, Zhao and Kroeker have directly measured the concentrations of non-bridging oxygens in borate glasses [14]. Kroeker has also related the B4 sites in caesium borate glasses to superstructural units using MAS-NMR [15]. The proportion of B4 in the borate glass as alkali modifier content is varied has been explored, again using MAS-NMR, by Clarida et al. [16]. Du and Stebbins have examined, using 3QMAS-NMR, the connectivities within borate glasses and shown that there are boroxol rings [17]. Further studies on the NMR response of boroxol rings were performed by Zwanziger in 2004 [18].
Alkali-borate glasses are still actively studied by many groups around the world and while there is now a great amount of knowledge about these glasses, there are still many unanswered questions about them and interesting research to perform on them.
Comparision of N4 fraction given by the Raman data (Fig. 17) against that given by NMR spectroscopy (Fig. 13) provides a calibration for one method from the other.
A linear fit has been used as the same composition must have the same N4 fraction regardless of technique used to probe it and, theoretically, both techniques used here should provide an absolute N4 fraction. The equation of the fit is given as N4 Raman = 0.87 (0.18) N4 NMR + 0.035 ( 0.056).
It has been shown (Fig. 13) that the addition of di-lithium oxide into boron oxide glass increases the boron co-ordination number and strengthens the network, at least up to 40 mol% Li 2O. It is suspected that beyond this level of doping, the N4 fraction will decrease, as is hinted at by the N4 fraction deviating from the x/(100-x) curve at the higher concentrations.
The N4 fraction given by Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 18) does not appear to be showing the same trend of decreasing N4 fraction at higher concentrations of Li 2O. It is important that the two techniques are in agreement if this method is to be reliable. In the future, this method of calibrating Raman N4 fractions against NMR N4 fractions will be performed on very structurally-complicated glasses that mimic nuclear waste glass. The technique must be robust and cover all feasible values of doping, not just from alkali metals. Currently, the Raman technique employed here is too sensitive to the data processing, such as baseline subtraction and peak fitting, to be considered robust. There is room for improvement and with further research into more complex glass systems using this calibration technique it will become possible to measure N4 fraction using Raman spectroscopy, even on nuclear waste glass.
The peak assignment for the boroxol and diborate groups has a high confidence. The triborate and dipentaborate groups do not have such a certain peak assignment, as they both contain six-membered rings with an amount of B4 present. This causes the Raman spectra to show similar peak trends that can not be used to accurately give the superstructural group. The B-O stretching assignment has been noted before in the literature, but its structural assignment to the symmetric boron between the boroxol units is an original proposition [2]. Boron-10 isotopic substitution could be employed to see if there is the expected shift up in frequency of the 1250 cm -1 peak, which would indicate the dependence of the boron mass on this stretching mode and consequently whether the structural assignment is valid.
Since the calibration method compares Raman N4 fraction to NMR N4 fraction, the precise composition of the glass is trivial. However, it is important that the glasses made are not contaminated with impurities as these may distort the appearance of the underlying trend. With the method 2 ramping rate of 600C per hour it is possible that the glasses made contained impurities dissolved into the melt from the furnace. Also, method 2 produced reduced yields due to the overflow of material on heating. Method 3, a halved ramping rate, was found to be a far more reliable method of consistent glass creation. Impurities, however, might still be dissolved into the melt from unclean crucibles, or from the metal plates when quenching, and steps must be taken to avoid these scenarios. Reasonable steps were taken to make sure the compositions were accurate; the reactants were generally of a high purity, the least being 99% pure lithium carbonate.
The samples were checked using XRD to ensure they were glasses, and STA to check if the glass transition temperature (T g) matched the literature values. The XRD confirmed the vitreous nature of the glasses and it is noted that it is hard to not form a glass for x &lt; 25. The STA measurements were of little help ascertaining composition as they were performed inconsistently and with long intervals between measurements. No trends were seen in the measurement of T g although the compositional variation is clearly seen to be reliable in the NMR and Raman measurements. A consistent and calibrated STA measurement on all the glasses is called for. Further compositional checks could be carried out by measuring the densities of the lithium borate glasses, as their values are well documented [26]. EDX measurements could also be performed on polished samples of the glasses to find any contamination.
Polishing the surface of the samples would also assist the Raman spectroscopy technique. Performing multiple readings at varying depths for each sample would determine if there were any structural changes due to chemical attack. Raman spectroscopy could also be performed over a range of temperatures to see which gave the optimal information about the superstructural units present. It would be interesting to know if the Raman spectra changed significantly at higher temperatures, such as those produced by radiogenic heating during the storage of radioactive waste.
Understanding the baseline of the Raman spectra would be helpful in performing an accurate subtraction of it. It is suspected to have a 4 Rayleigh-scattering dependence, but this has not been fully tested. A second-order polynomial was used as a baseline as it provided the most accurate fit over the range used, but at larger wavenumbers this model deviated considerable. It is suspected that a main error in the N4 fraction values from the Raman spectroscopy come from the inaccurate baseline subtraction. As compositions x=33 1/3 to x=40 were fitted with a different baseline, not touching at 1700 cm -1, a systematic error is possible in the results for these higher compositions.
For compositions greater than x=30, when there are no more boroxol rings, other superstructural groups are likely to be present. Their peaks and impact on the total N4 fraction measured were not accounted for and this could be a reason for the deviation from the expected N4 fractions for the higher compositions.
Another potential source of error in the Raman technique is the peak fitting. The number of peaks is not known and so estimations and approximations must be made. The peaks that are fitted are broad and often overlap with their neighbours so they cannot be resolved; this hampers clear superstructural group assignments. It should be possible to have a computer program to look through the Raman spectra of all the compositions and taking, say, 5 cm -1 strips at a time, try to detect if there is any systematic variation with composition. This would cut out the ambiguous peak fitting and get straight to the important compositional variation, a key indicator of superstructural groups. This would also rule out errors from incorrect assumptions about the number of peaks in the spectra.
If convincing systematic variation was detected, there would still be the issue of which superstructural group was actually causing it. Debate still goes on about which units are really present in borate glasses and crystals. Contrary to theory proposed by Kerner the Raman spectra can be interpreted without tetraborate and still produce likely N4 fractions [19]. A definite list of peak assignments in borate glasses would be ideal, but for now the best practice is to focus on the systematic variation of area and make an informed estimate. It is important to remain rigorous and systematic, across compositions, for the peak assignments to give reliable N4 fractions.
Whilst the N4 fractions given by Raman are uncertain, the error is much less for the N4 fractions given by NMR, as the B3 and B4 sites are so easily distinguishable by the NMR technique. The ability for the high-field 1D MAS experiment to confidently report the N4 fraction is remarkable. Figure 13 shows the NMR N4 fraction to be in very good agreement, up to x=30, with the theoretical model. It should be noted, however, that each data point from x=5 to x=25 is slightly above what is predicted by the theory. This systematic positive deviation could be due to the 1.04 multiplier for the B3 peak area not being large enough. Calculations suggest this correction should be nearer to 1.13 times the B3 area to match the data to the model.
The 2D MQMAS experiment suffered some failings. The lack of power to the probe is a significant, but easily remedied, problem. The difficulties in optimising the length of the pulses experimentally could be avoided by using theory to calculate the optimal lengths instead. As noise is an issue with the MQMAS experiment a modern receiver on the spectrometer would reduce this and enhance the signal-to-noise ratio. Although it is interesting to observe how the symmetric and asymmetric quadrupolar lines fit into the broad B3-site peak, this is not necessary for finding the total N4 fraction. The B3 peak was fitted with two lines for the calculations, but it was shown that a distribution of quadrupolar lines with =0 can be made to fit the peak just as well.
As NMR is sensitive to the local structural environment of the nucleus it is probing it might be possible to see if the cobalt atoms changed the structure significantly when substituted for the di-lithium atoms, if the cobalt oxide was not paramagnetic and caused the spectra to broaden. The reason paramagnetic species cause the NMR spectrum to broaden is because they provide a larger spread of magnetic fields within the sample and hence cause a large variation in precession frequency. The task of understanding the properties of borate glasses as they are doped with paramagnetic species is an important one as, ultimately, the nuclear waste glass will contain significant numbers of paramagnetic species of all sizes. It is important that the Raman to NMR calibration holds for all similar structures if it is to be of practical use.
To further improve the calibration more data points should be collected. The closer together the compositions the finer the systematic variation of superstructural groups will appear in the Raman spectra. This would further restrict the choice of superstructural groups and hopefully lead to an accurate peak assignment. Making compositions greater than the x=40 studied here would further refine the calibration. Making glasses of high lithium content will require very fast cooling to prevent devitrification, such as roller quenching. It is important that the calibration can ultimately work for all feasible values of x.
Over the compositional range x=0 to x=40 of xLi 2O(100-x)B 2O 3 the N4 fraction was determined through the application the boron-11 MAS NMR spectroscopy and Raman spectroscopy. Calibrating the Raman results to the NMR results gives a linear fit of N4 Raman = 0.87 (0.18) N4 NMR + 0.035 ( 0.056). This calibration is suitable over the range covered, but is deemed less reliable at the higher compositions due to potential errors in the baseline subtractions and superstructural group peak assignments. The methods used have been shown to provide accurate and repeatable results. There should be continued research into the superstructural units present in borate glasses at higher compositions, as well as with different alkali modifiers. A rigorous and systematic study of the Raman peaks and their superstructural group assignments would be paramount for any future study hoping to provide an accurate N4 fraction measurement. Studies like this are vital for the endeavour of characterising nuclear waste glass. It is conceived that, one day, nuclear waste glass will be probed on-site, using portable Raman spectroscopy, and an accurate value for the N4 fraction given with a high degree of certainty.