The rise and fall of the Third Reich had the most profound of consequences for the Czechoslovak lands and people. Beginning on the night of 15 March 1939, official Nazi occupation of Bohemia and Moravia endured until 13 May 1945. Nazi dominance over the region was one of the darkest periods in Czechoslovak history, and Czechoslovak leaders had only limited scope to protect their nation and its population. Edvard Bene Bene He resigned on 5 October 1938, and became leader of the government-in-exile in London during the Naxi occupation. Bene The complexity and difficulty of the situation for these two men cannot be overstated. Geopolitics far greater than the power of a Czechoslovak republic threatened to thwart every effort made by the outstanding political tactician that was Bene The blood of millions of Czechoslovaks was potentially the responsibility of Bene It is certainly not the place of the author to seriously judge either of these men in their unenviable struggles. Yet, their strategies and actions can be evaluated with respect to whether they interpreted the needs of their people well, and their success can be considered too. The following enquiry will be primarily concerned with the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia, and 'Czech' people will be taken to mean ethnic Czechs, who were by far the majority of the Protectorate's population. Diaries and memoirs, minutes of official meetings, accounts of conversations, letters and memoranda, and communist reports and despatches, from Czech, German, British, American, and Soviet political figures will be used to determine the strategy and success of Edvard Bene
Both Bene Bene However, he was energetic and made himself not only visible, but also useful, to the Allies. The legal anomaly that he was not actually the Czechoslovak president was not so much overcome as overlooked, By late 1939 Bene Once Bene In addition, Bene He would do so through being a useful source of information for anxious powers, an impressive diplomat and mediator, head of potential Czech armed forces, and head of security apparatus willing to supply the Allies with intelligence.
Although Bene It was only in the aftermath of the fall of France, in July 1940, that a provisional Czechoslovak government and parliament were recognised. The British, at this point, still refused to agree to future territorial arrangements. It was Molotov for the Soviet Union who was first to indicate that this would be realised. In a conversation in June 1942 the commissar assured Bene
On the other hand, the main example of these powers responding to the Czech' leader's initiative was the repudiation of Munich, which resulted from Operation Anthropoid. Bene On 27 May 1942 two Czech assassins, who had been supported by an underground network in Britain and the Protectorate, attacked the Nazi leader in the Protectorate Reinhard Heydrich, who died a week later. In addition to ensuring that every participant and underground assistant to the assassins was killed, the Nazis completely destroyed the towns of Lidice and Le It was these heavy recriminations against the Czechs in its aftermath, rather than the actual gesture of assassination, which convinced Britain to officially repudiate Munich in August. The price that Bene
Thereafter, Bene He devoted himself as mediator for Poland, especially after the breakdown in their relations with Moscow in June 1944. Representing Poland was certainly in the Czechoslovak national interest. Between November 1940 and mid-1942 Bene Convinced that the Soviet Union would emerge from the war as a moderate European great power, Bene Bene Bene After working hard to persuade Britain, Bene For all of his foresight and efforts, Bene
Bene However, his tireless efforts resulted in serious failures too. The most grave was, of course, his failure to prevent Czech communists from gaining a following and power during, and especially in the aftermath of, the war. Once the Soviet Union entered on the side of the Allies on 22 June 1941, the Czech communists in Moscow, the government-in-exile, and the Czech underground did achieve a substantial degree of unity in their resistance to the Nazis, but politically they were antagonistic. Fierlinger reported to the exile government on 4 January 1942 that 'Some pseudo-liberal regime will not have the support in Moscow that is expected." By May, Bene 'By the time Bene Yet, his positive feelings towards the Soviet Union were too great an influence on Bene Mastny is particularly critical of his naivety. His secretary Taborsky regarded the December 1943 treaty as Bene 'Bene Another painful example of Benes' powerlessness was the affair over Sub-Carpathian Ruthenia beginning in October 1944. In a letter to Fierlinger on 30 December 1944, Bene The participation of communists in the post-war government was also in excess of his expectations.
In addition to his work for the future Czechoslovak people, Bene Bene Bene Instead he favoured gathering intelligence as a bargaining tool as well as for protection of the Czech population, an undetectable strategy of sabotaging German communications, and passive resistance of Czechs working for the Nazi war effort. However, aware that the communists had supported active resistance from the outset, and sensitive to their criticism of him, by February 1944 Bene By August 1944 pressure from Moscow and London, Bene Only when it was evident that the Reich would imminently collapse did he envisage the underground taking to the streets, seizing official positions and re-occupying the country. The final uprising for Prague lasted four days with 2,000 lives lost, in order to demonstrate that the Czechs did not intend to passively await liberation, which was, nonetheless, liberated by the Red Army on 9 May 1945. More than 50,000 Czechs were tortured or murdered during the occupation - far more than the government-in-exile had expected. Bene
On the other hand, H Charged by Bene H So arguably Neurath was the more successful protector of Czech lives than H Neurath and H Head of the security apparatus K. H. Frank was the principal threat towards the Czech people for H
Part of H By gaining their confidence, H Hitler believed H Encouraged that H
H However, his efforts came under increasingly severe limitation by various Nazis and from Bene H Bene H The first followed the Nazi response to the 28 October and 15 November 1939 student demonstrations. However, Frank made it clear that he would interpret such a move as provocation, and Neurath convinced him that his resignation would damage the Czech cause.
However, the greatest obstacle to H H Between late September and early October, many of his colleagues and friends were arrested (including the Prime Minister Alois Eli Instead he embarked on a policy of collaboration, designed to spare the Czech people further bloodshed.
The situation worsened following the assassination of Heydrich. Hitler called H At this point H At the same meeting H As a result of the meeting the president oversaw the arrangement of a huge rally where the organisers arranged an appeal for complete co-operation with the Third Reich. After Hitler surmised this attitude as being '100 per cent pro-German'. He could only strive to protect his colleagues such as Eli
In conclusion, Edvard Bene Fighting for the survival of the republic and its people fell heavily on their responsibility. Bene Meanwhile, H Bene The Czechoslovak republic was relatively the most peaceful of the occupied territories throughout the war, and its population experienced a markedly higher living standard than the Reich itself. Yet, this had more to do with the population being so instrumental to war production for the Reich, rather that the ability of their president to temper Nazis. Perhaps H His death would have been a symbolic martyrdom, but most probably a futile action, as he would have been replaced by someone even less irritant to the occupying regime, and therefore less of a protector of the Czech people. The author is ill-qualified to weigh Bene It is so important to examine cases such the actions of Bene More generally, inquiry raises fundamental moral questions about the politics of war, nations, and of humanity.