Kidde plc, a global supplier of fire and safety products, is achieving increasing sales and profitability. Kidde is a highly geared company, but its reliance on loans is being reduced. Net debt is decreasing, although at the expense of cash flow and returns for shareholders. Kidde's acquisition policy also consumes much cash, and dividends have improved little in comparison with available shareholders funds. Liquidity is an area of concern with short term debts increasingly outweighing current assets.
Adjustments for Goodwill and Provisions are areas in which Kidde can affect profit levels by subjective judgements. Kidde is in a consolidation period whereby it is investing its earnings for the future and shareholders should expect little improvement on returns at this time. It is therefore recommended at the end of 2003 that shareholders
Future prospects for Kidde are positive, with a number of opportunities arising. Significant growth in the security market coupled with recent acquisitions should help Kidde's sales throughout the world. Kidde's continuing acquisition strategy seeks to replace investments in Baxi and Robblialac which generated significant proceeds from their sale. Kidde's exposure to currency, taxation and interest rates could have significant affects on profits over the coming year. Half year results show general continued growth in sales and profits, and a significant reduction in net debt. UTC's takeover bid raises Kidde's prospects significantly, but also introduces new risks.
"Kidde is a leading global supplier of fire and safety products, systems and services under a range of well-known and trusted brand names to industrial, commercial, aerospace, combustion control and retail customers." Kidde plc has existed since its demerger from the Williams group in 2000. This report will analyse Kidde's financial position and draw conclusions as to the strengths and weakness of the company. Part I will discuss the past performance of Kidde, concentrating on the contents of the 2003 Annual report. A number of indicators will be used to assess important aspects such as profitability, liquidity, efficiency and shareholders returns. Several important accounting adjustments will be looked at to assess the reliability of the annual report. Finally, a recommendation will be made to shareholders for the end of the 2003 financial year. Part II will consider the future prospects of Kidde plc over the next financial year, focussing on Market Opportunities, Acquisitions, financial data from the interim report and any significant issues highlighted by the 2003 Annual report. Unless stated otherwise, financial data used in the report is taken from Kidde plc Annual reports. Only data from 2000 onwards has been used.