The aim of this project was to investigate the influence of a wall on the movement of a vortex ring travelling in water, with the final intention of determining whether a tank used for vortex generation in the fluids department is big enough so as not to have an effect on the rings produced within it, i.e. whether it can be assumed that there is an infinite distance between the rings and the wall.
An existing vortex ring generator was used with modifications within it in order to vary the distance of a wall from the rings being produced. The rings were produced using a piston/nozzle arrangement, within which the variables of piston velocity and piston stroke length were altered. Altering these variables changed the internal properties and size of the vortex rings produced, enabling comparison between the wall distance and different vortex ring scenarios.
It was discovered that at as the wall distance decreased, the effect on the vortex rings increased to a high extent. In most cases the vortex rings changed direction and moved towards the wall and hit it, instead of continuing in their intended vertical motion. At wall distances of 135mm, only comparatively minor changes in direction were noted. However, greater distances were not experimented with due to physical complications with the tank layout.
Although the evidence cannot be considered as conclusive, the data found does suggest that the diameter of the tank is large enough not effect the movement of the vortex rings within it.
The aim of this project was to investigate the influence of a wall on the movement of a vortex ring travelling in water, with the final intention of determining whether a tank used for vortex generation in the fluids department is big enough so as not to have an effect on the rings produced within it, i.e. whether it can be assumed that there is an infinite distance between the rings and the wall. It was also desirable to determine at what particular distance the wall begins to influence the vortex rings.
The project was put forward by Dr Peter J Thomas as a response to analysts suggesting that the tank of water did not have a large enough diameter for the rings produced within it not to be influenced by the walls.
Experimentation will be done on an existing vortex ring generator with modifications in order to investigate the effect of a wall in the vicinity of the vortex rings.
The vortex rings that have been produced can be thought of as being similar to smoke rings that a proficient smoker can blow. The differences are that in this case the rings are produced in water by the movement of a piston, and are visualised using a dye, rather than through the use of smoke.
Vortex rings have been investigated to a large extent for at over a century, using increasingly sophisticated methods to produce them and investigate their behaviour. Initially, basic methods such as allowing "a drop of water, lightly colored (sic) with milk or food dye, to fall from an eye-dropper or a burette into a glass of water" (Shariff, 1992) were used. As technology increased more technical and repeatable techniques were developed, producing the method of pushing fluid through a nozzle using a piston. More recently, computer models have been set up in order to model vortex rings, with varying degrees of success.
Vortex rings are not only formed in the laboratory, they are occasionally formed in nature, such as from volcanoes in the form of smoke rings, or even by dolphins in the form of air rings. Figure 4.1 shows a beluga whale blows a ring at the Vancouver Aquarium.
Another case, although not related to this project, is the production of vortex rings as dark solitons decayed in a Bose-Einstein Condensate (Anderson, Haljan, Regal, Feder, Collins, Clark, Cornell). This is an example of how "accelerating ions in superfluid helium create quantized vortex rings" as stated in (Shariff, 1992).
The technique of vortex ring production, where fluid is pushed through a nozzle is the most commonly used, as it is fairly simple to produce and has a high degree of repeatability. The reason that pushing fluid through a nozzle produces a vortex ring is that "a blob of fluid emerges from the hole", which then "rolls up into the form of an oblate spheroid owing to the self-induction of the vorticity produced at the edge of the hole." (Maxworthy, 1974) or as described by (Glezer, 1988) "The flow separates at the edge of the orifice and a cylindrical vortex sheet forms and rolls up into a vortex ring." A model of this self-similar roll-up is described by Shariff and then modelled and computed to an extent, by Nitsche and Krasny (1994), that photos of actual roll-up and computed roll-up would be fairly difficult to identify from one another by eye. The vortex ring formation process is also modelled to a high extent more recently by Mohseni, Ran, and Colonius (2001).
Many different aspects of vortex rings have been investigated which include the factors that determine whether a ring is laminar or turbulent, the properties of these forms, interactions between vortex rings and other bodies, and also visually appealing phenomena such as leapfrogging of rings.
In 1987 Glezer examined the factors which determine whether a "given vortex generator produces either an initially laminar ring, which may or may not undergo instability and transition to turbulence, or an initially turbulent ring." (Glezer, 1988) Through experimentation with different nozzle diameters, piston velocities, and stroke lengths, a "transition map that reveals a reasonably well defined boundary separating vortex rings that are turbulent upon formation from those that are not" (Glezer, 1988) was produced. This was important because a range of dimensionless parameters were formed which allow for translation onto other similar experiments, which do not necessarily use the same geometries. Glezer states that his experimental set up has "properties that make it attractive as a standard" (Glezer, 1988).
Glezer's work was important because it defined to a reasonable extent when a vortex ring would be either laminar or turbulent on formation. This is important because the properties of laminar and turbulent rings are inherently different from one another. Shariff discusses the properties of laminar and turbulent rings to a high extent in his paper 'Vortex Rings'. Essentially, a turbulent vortex ring can be described as "a compact turbulent region with net linear momentum, statistically invariant with respect to rotation about one axis" (Shariff, 1988) Vortex rings can not only be turbulent initially upon formation, but a laminar vortex ring can also become turbulent. Maxworthy suggests that this is due to an azimuthal instability within the ring core. The conditions that determine whether a vortex ring changes from laminar to turbulent, and possibly back again, depends, according to Maxworthy (1972), on its Renold's number. At low values, a laminar ring will continue its movement until the edge of a tank or another boundary is reached. At a Renold's number of greater than 600, an azimuthal instability will occur, yet the ring will not transform into a turbulent state. For higher values of Renold's number, Maxworthy states that in his observations a ring would gain an azimuthal instability and then "the wavy structure collapsed into a turbulent blob and the vorticity was effectively cancelled by turbulent diffusion" (Maxworthy, 1972). At very large values of Renold's number the ring would become turbulent, an "apparently disorganised vorticity field" (Maxworthy, 1972), and from this a new vortex ring was formed.
These studies of vortex rings are relevant to the project at hand, due to the fact that the form of vortex ring is relevant to its subsequent activity. However, studies on vortex ring interactions with various bodies have been done which are relevant to a greater extent. Much of these experiments are concerned with the interactions between a vortex ring and objects that are placed in its way. D. Rockwell, in 'Vortex-Body Interactions', investigates the "interactions of a vortex, or combinations of them, with a cylinder, blade, or foil".
Vortex rings have also been fired towards a wall normal to its axis in order to investigate the effects of the wall on the ring as it draws closer to it, as it collides with it, and after it collides with it. Boldes and Ferreri in 'Behaviour of vortex rings in the vicinity of a wall' investigated this to quite a high extent. In this it was discovered that a "vortex ring traveling (sic) toward a wall situated normal to its axis may undergo momentary inversions of its forward momentum." (Boldes, 1973)
However, the most relevant piece of research that has been done, in terms of this project, is the work Yue, Zhang, and Shen in their work 'The Mechanism of Vortex Connection at a Free Surface'. This is relevant because they consider a free surface parallel to the axis of the vortex ring, which is the same situation as that in this project. They consider this through numerical modelling of the problem, resulting in some extremely interesting images of the impact of rings with the free surface, which can be related to back to the project work done. Figure 4.2 shows what can be considered as one of the major findings in this work, the evolution of the vortex ring as it approaches and meets the free surface. Yue states, "The key to understanding the mechanism of vortex connection at a free surface is the surface layers": a viscous layer, and a thicker blockage layer.
More recently, work on vortex rings has been far more specific and technically complicated. This is due to the fact that the basics of vortex rings were understood by the end of the 1980s, and with computer advancement in the 1990s, more complex ideas could be explored.
Much of the previous work on vortex rings is either based on experimental data or numerical modelling. However, there seems to be a lack in a combination of the two. This may be due to the fact that in order to do this, a specialisation in both computer and practical techniques would be needed. It is important to draw on both models and real-life tests because an effective computer model represents a fairly good understanding of the topic at hand. However, to know that it is an effective model, it should be compared to what actually happens. An example of this is the above Figure 4.2. From observation during this project, the figure can be seen to be visually fairly representative of the true situation, however there is little reference to this within Yue's paper. One paper that makes good use of a comparison between experimental and numerical studies is by Nitsche and Krasny, who, as stated before, produce a startlingly realistic model of the formation of a vortex ring at the end of a cylinder.
Many of the experimental studies given use similar apparatus in order to do the same experiments, a piston-cylinder-nozzle arrangement is used. Glezer made an attempt to standardise this in 1988, as stated previously, by which time many of these similar experiments had been done. It would have seemed wise to attempt to standardise this at an earlier date. In Maxworthy's 1977 paper 'Some experimental studies of vortex rings', a number of different apparatus set-ups are used in different locations. This is explained by the statement that it a "certain unique piece of apparatus existed at each one (location) that could not be conveniently reassembled or manufactured in a common place." (Maxworthy, 1977) Even though this is understandable due to time and money constraints, it could have been an opportunity to standardise this apparatus, due to the relevance and scale of the reports submitted by Maxworthy.
Even though some of this material is covered in the literature review, it seems wise to clarify important theory that has a relation to the project topic.
A vortex ring is a toroidal shaped ring, which in this project is considered to be axi-symmetric. Lim and Nickels define a vortex ring as a "bounded region of vorticity in a fluid in which vortex lines form closed loops."
Vortex rings can be formed by forcing a volume of fluid out of a nozzle. This is shown in Figure 5.1.
The research strategy to find information relevant to the project was to initially ask supervisors for recommended reading. This basic recommended reading was then studied in order to find specific terms that needed to be researched in order to further the project. This research was carried out using a Library search page in order to search available journals for the subject. An additional literature search was done on Google Scholar. If any other points of interest arose through the course of the project these were also researched.
It is easy to recognise, almost after reading the summary, whether a particular article was relevant to the specification of the project. However, it was often worth looking through less relevant articles in order to obtain a greater background to the project. If the article was relevant, it was read through and then highlighted in order to identify information that was pertinent to the project specification.
In this section the experimental equipment used will be identified and discussed.
In this section the set up and experimental procedure will be discussed.
I would like to extend my thanks to  and  who have played a major role in the supervision of this project. Also, to those in the laboratories, , , and numerous other technicians.