The major objectives of this laboratory were to develop an understanding of:
A three-phase induction motor was connected to a dynamometer (electrically controlled brake) and a tachometer (electrical speed measuring device). A control box provided the manual adjustment of the braking torque and displayed the speed, torque, mechanical power, current, power factor and electrical power input. The load or torque was varied from 0 to a value when the motor stopped running (4.5 N/m). The consequent data was noted from the display. Graphs of torque against speed and efficiency against mechanical power were plotted. Using the data and the graphs, it was concluded that the torque has a non-linear and inverse relationship with the speed of the motor. The second graph showed the efficiency was directly proportional to the mechanical power and that the efficiency of the motor at the rated load is the maximum efficiency for that motor (69%).
The power factor at no load was found out to be 0.25 and at full load it was 0.84. The rated values of the motor occurred when the torque was 2.0 N/m.
Also, a current probe and oscilloscope were used to get the graphs of current against time for the inductive motor at full load and at no load. The peak starting current of the motor in both cases was 5 A. It was observed that at full load, the motor took a much longer time to reach the operating speed (200 ms) than when it was at no load (100 ms).
A system An electrical power system comprises of characteristics such as speed, current, voltage, mechanical power, power factor and torque. These are interrelated i.e. a change in one brings about changes in the rest of the attributes. The purpose of this laboratory was to help understand the relationship between the above characteristics, to analyse the performance of a small three-phase induction motor and measure its torque and mechanical power.
The three-phase induction motor was connected to a dynamometer (an electrically-controlled brake) and a tachometer (an electrical speed measuring device. Different torque measurements were taken and the corresponding values of measured speed, current, calculated mechanical power and power factor were recorded. Graphs were plotted to investigate the relationship between the torque and speed of the motor, as well as its efficiency and mechanical power with different loads. The time taken by the motor to reach its operating speed was observed and compared with varying loads applied to it. It was deduced that at no load the motor took least time to reach its operating speed from its original speed, while it took a large amount of time to do the same with a large load.
The laboratory was significantly involved with the functioning of the induction motor as well as the concept of power factor. The theories are explained below.
The ratings of the motor are as follows:
In the preparation, the values of L1, L2 and L3 along with the voltage value from page 1 of the display are taken down as:
Voltage from page 1: 114 V = 3 of the average of the three lines = 3 x 65.8 V
The following are the recorded values of torque, speed, current, power factor, electrical power and mechanical power while a varying load is applied to the motor:
When the torque equals 4.5 N/m, the motor stops working. No electrical power is detected at this instance. Hence, the values at this load can be ignored.
The efficiencies of the motor with different loads are calculated using the formula
The graph of torque against speed (Refer to Graph A) is plotted. It is observed from the graph, that the speed of the motor is maximum at no-load. Hence, it decreases considerably with the increasing torque. Thus, torque and speed have a non-linear inverse relationship.
The graph of efficiency against mechanical power (Refer to Graph B) is plotted. The graph shows that they have a non-linear relation and are directly proportional to each other till a certain value, after which the efficiency of the motor starts to fall. This value is the rated mechanical power value for the motor. Hence, the rated value is the point of maximum efficiency for the motor (69%). It can be deduced that running the motor to drive small loads becomes disadvantageous since the efficiency is not maximised. There is more loss of energy at low loads.
Observing the power factor from Table 1 shows that it equals 0.25 at no load and equals 0.84 at maximum load. This means that the current lag decreases as the load is increased.
Comparing the test results in Table 1 with the ratings of the motor shows that the values approximately correspond to when the torque = 2.0 N/m. Hence, it can be concluded that the motor becomes unfit to work beyond this value of torque.
Comparing the graphs of the current against time from the oscilloscope (Graph C and Graph D) shows that the peak starting current of both instances equals 5 Amps. But, the motor takes extremely long to reach the operating speed when it is on full load (200 ms) and takes a small amount of time when it is on no load (100 ms).
The aim of the experiment was to investigate the relationship between the characteristics of a three-phase induction motor. It also analysed the performance of the motor and measured its torque and mechanical power.
As seen from the results and the graphs, the torque is inversely proportional to the speed of the motor. The efficiency, on the other hand, is directly proportional to the mechanical power. Also, the motor takes more time to reach the operating speed from start at full load as compared to no load.