In this report a first order plus deadtime system is analysed under different parameters and control methods.
In section 2.1 analogue control is considered. The effects of system frequency and controller gain on system stability are analysed. A proportional only controller is used to create a system which oscillated continuously, and the system value after  is calculated using the final value theorem.
Discrete control is considered in 2.2. A proportional controller with zero-order hold is designed. Using values obtained in 2.1, the final value of this system is calculated using the Z-transform final value theorem. Comparisons are drawn with its analogue counterpart.
In part 2.3 Ziegler Nichols design values are used to design a PID controller. It is discretised using backward differencing and a Dahlin controller is designed; comparisons are drawn between the two.
In section 3 controllers discussed previously are simulated using the 'Sampled Data System'. Performance and characteristics are compared and examined.
Conclusions drawn are as follows;
Overshoot, oscillations and a large settling time are characteristics of the proportional only controller.
The PID control significantly reduced the settling time given by a proportional only controller.
The Dahlin controller removes the oscillations seen in the PID controller.
University No.
First order plus dead time process with Laplace transfer function;
Where steady state gain , pure time delay , and the time constant  from 'Initial Work'.
Overshoot, oscillations, steady state error and a large settling time are characteristics of the proportional only controller.
The PID control significantly reduced the settling time and removes steady state error given by a proportional only controller.
The Dahlin controller removes the oscillations seen in the PID controller.
At a steady state gain , a pure time delay of 1s and a time constant of 4.64s a proportional only analogue control loop will continuously oscillate at  and after an applied step increase will have a final value of ~0.8V.
At a steady state gain , a pure time delay of 1s and a time constant of 4.64s a proportional only discrete control loop will have a maximum value for controller stability of  and step response final value of ~0.8V.
A Ziegler Nichols tuned discrete PID controller with design parameters ,  and  will have a transfer function;
Using the Dahlin control method the discrete PID controller will have a transfer function;