The major objectives of this laboratory were:
The product to be manufactured was an oilite bush. Six bearings were to be made, with two groups of students making three each. The amount of powder (iron and zinc stearate) required for the bearings was weighed according to the specifications given in the laboratory handout. The powder required for one bearing was put into the die and pressed by the hydraulic press. It was then removed from the die using the hand press and the dimensions were recorded. The same process was used to make six bearings by two groups of students. These were then kept in the furnace for sintering for 20 minutes. The dimensions were noted again and the bearings were then applied with axial loads till failure. The load at which the bearings failed was noted.
Using the recorded data, Table 1 and Table 2 were completed by calculating the density (before and after sintering), R, ln [1 / (1-R)], porosity (after sintering) and the density change (after sintering). The apparent density was calculated for each bearing. A graph was plotted for ln [1 / (1-R)] against the compaction pressure. The graph line is not straight, but its trend line can be used to calculate the pressure at which
It was observed that the laboratory process of measuring the powder by weight was unsuitable for an industrial manufacture. It was concluded that measuring by volume was a better alternative for the method used. Also, it was evident that a change in one variable during the process modified the end product, yet a change in a second variable could compensate for the change in the first.
A full set of variables was provided at the end, to make the bearings to the specifications listed in the handout.
Manufacturing a product requires a blend of different raw materials that are processed by a combination of methods and techniques. The end product may have varying physical and chemical properties as opposed to those characteristics that are possessed by the raw materials at the beginning of the production. These changes take place because of the different types of processes that the raw materials undergo, and greatly depend on any modification brought about to the variables involved in the processes. The purpose of this laboratory was to recognize and note that forming a product comprises of many changes that are brought about in the raw materials and any modifications in the process variables alter the end product.
The product to be made was an iron self-lubricating bearing called an oilite bush. A bush
It is designed to fit into a hole, usually with a loose fit. The amount of iron powder and lubricant, Zinc Stearate, were measured for six bearings according to the specifications listed in the laboratory handout (attached). The quantity of powder enough for one bearing was set into the die and was compressed by a hydraulic press. The bearing was extracted by the hand press and its dimensions were noted. Similarly, three bearings were pressed out by two groups each, and were kept in the furnace for sintering. Then their dimensions were measured again and an axial load was applied to each bearing till they broke due to the pressure. This maximum load was noted.
After calculations using the recorded data (Refer Tables 1, 2 and 3), a graph was plotted for ln [1 / (1-R)] against the compaction pressure (in MPa) (Refer Graph A). It was observed that the graph could be used to calculate the pressure at which The apparent density was calculated for all the bearings.
At the end of the laboratory, a graph was plotted for ln [1 / (1-R)] against the compaction pressure (in MPa) (Refer Graph A). It is observed that the graph line is not straight, but the trend line can be used to calculate the pressure at which This is the density of iron that is listed in the design specification.
Using the length of the uncompressed powder measured at the beginning of the powder compaction stage, the apparent density of the powder in the die cavity, This density is affected by factors such as a change in the amount of powder that is put into the die, the manual pressure that is applied to it, and the measurements of the external and bore radius of the die.
The apparent density is so called because at the stage when the length L It is observed that Hence,
The laboratory process seemed to be suitable for small-scale processing of bearings, but inappropriate for any large-scale manufacturing. This is because the laboratory process involved the measurement of the powder by weight, which was time consuming and hence, cannot be used on an industrial level.
A better method to fill the die would be the measurement of the powder required for the bearings by volume. This will consume less time and will be more economical for a process that would manufacture millions of small oilite bushes.
The laboratory highlights that fact that changing one variable during the process of manufacture alters the end product, but a change in another variable can prevent the alteration of the product. For example, an increase in the mass of the powder will change the density of the bearing, but the length can also be decreased to keep the density constant.
Referring to Table 3, it can be observed that not all the bearings have final measurements that fall under the product design specification listed in the laboratory handout. Hence, the values that are highlighted in bold are those that are the correct final values. The bearing that was loaded with a compaction pressure of 2.0 Tons from our final product seems to be most suitable for the manufacture of required bearing. Its specifications are:
This is the most ideal bearing, though there may be a bearing more suitable to the specification from those that had been sintered for 10 and 30 minutes. These cannot be compared with in this laboratory due to the lack of data available.
The aim of the experiment was to appreciate various factors concerned with manufacturing a bearing. It analysed the fact that a manufacturing process involves many factors that need to be considered when raw material is converted into a useful product. Also, if any process variables are changed, the properties of the final product may change, but changing another variable in the process can compensate for this.
Also, the laboratory highlights that there are many differences between the processes used in small scale processing as compared to large scale industrial manufacturing.