The objective of this report is to design a cross-flow heat exchanger which gives optimum payback time. The design variables are height, depth, fan model, and fin type. The optimum design was found by analysis of fins and fans, followed by an iterative procedure.
From the results the following conclusions can be drawn;
The lower power fans are more appropriate for this type of heat exchanger. The capital costs have a negative impact on the payback time, hence only the lower power fans are economically viable.
The louvered fin design is much more efficient and effective that the plain fin design due to larger surface area and increased turbulence.
The effectiveness increases with size of the heat exchanger.
The best design was found be a heat exchanger of width 0.22809m, height 0.22809m and depth 0.65872m utilizing the louvered 10.39 fins, with the 83GW 6pole fan. This design gave the optimum payback time of 2.21 years.
Heat exchangers are commonly used to transfer heat from steam, water, or gases, to gases, or liquids. The purpose of this report is to optimise the design of a cross-flow heat exchanger in order to obtain the most desirable payback time. Heat exchangers play a dominant role in the performance of most energy systems; however, optimization of these components is a complex task due to the coupled nature of the design parameters involved. Anytime the heat transfer coefficient is increased in these components, there is a corresponding increase in frictional pressure drop; therefore, a delicate balance is required between these two effects in heat exchanger optimization.
The report shows that the best design was found be a heat exchanger of width 0.22809m, height 0.22809m and depth 0.65872m utilizing the louvered 10.39 fins, with the 83GW 6pole fan. This design gave the optimum payback time of 2.21 years.
Formulae used in calculations and spreadsheet, taken from appendices 2-6.
The heat exchanger analysis will be based around the following problem;
The allowable pressure drop in the extract side of the heat exchanger is 300Pa and the flow rate is 700m^3/hr
The heating season is October to April inclusive with a mean outside temperature of 7.5C whilst the plant is in operation (8 hours/day, 5 days/week)
The factory is heated by oil costing 22p/litre with S.G. 0.8 and a calorific value of 45 MJ/Kg. The heating system efficiency is 70%. Electricity costs 5p/kWh.
Assume the pressure drop is the fresh air duct is 3x the dynamic head.
Assume equal flow rates and properties on both sides of the heat exchanger.
Construction material is aluminium, conductivity 173 W/mK, cost
Overheads of 400% apply to the aluminium used in the heat exchanger, fresh air duct and casing.
A diagram of the problem can be seen in appendix 1.
See CD on inside cover
Charts - Appendices 13-21
The charts in Appendices 13-21 show the optimised payback times for the different fins. Where there is no value of payback time for a specific fan, the design never pays for itself, hence cannot be optimised. There are no results when using plate fin 10.37; this fin cannot produce a reasonable design.
At a glance it can be seen that when using the lower power fans a lower payback time is achieved. This is obvious from the 'best designs' chart in appendix 20 , where all but one of the designs utilise the 6 pole 83GW fan, which of all the fans analysed requires the lowest power. Also note that all the fans shown in appendix 20 are 6pole fans. The capital and running costs of the lesser pole fans proved too high for this particular heat exchanger design. The power requirements and initial price of the larger fans are not realistic for the type of heat exchanger in question, however may be more reliable and so provide more long-term benefits. Due to the lack of information on this aspect, further analysis and discussion is impossible.
The larger fans allow for a larger, more effective heat exchanger. This is visible in the data tables and illustrated in appendix 21. However this increase in effectiveness does not compensate for the capital, and annual costs of the larger fans. The larger heat exchangers also save more energy and oil, again clearly visible from the data tables; however the difference is not comparable to the extra energy required to power the larger fan.
When the best results from each fin design are compared, this is illustrated in appendix 20, it can be seen that the louvered fins provide the best payback times. The difference between the louvered and plain-fin designs is quite remarkable, although not unexpected. The louvered designs provided a larger surface area and also increase the turbulence of the passing air, giving greatly improved heat transfer. Detailed analysis of why louvered fins improve performance is given in appendix 22. Comparisons between louvered fins and various other fins are shown in appendix 26. The table shown clearly demonstrates that the louvered fin, although most expensive, is the most effective design. The graph reiterates this showing the louvered fin to have the best heat transfer per unit weight.
The optimum design calculated from this analysis was a heat exchanger of width 0.22809m, height 0.22809m and depth 0.65872m utilizing the louvered 10.39 fins, with the 83GW 6pole fan. It can be seen from the chart in appendix 20 that this design gives a payback time of 2.21 years.
There are several areas in which the heat exchanger analysis could be improved and developed. Recommendations for further investigation are as follows;
More data on the fans is required. More accurate tolerances are required in order to obtain optimum analytical results.
Multiple passes for the exchanger should be analysed. In perform this analysis further information is required on how much money an extra pass will cost etc. It is known that multiple passes increase the efficiency and payback time.
Other fin designs should be researched and analysed, for example pin and wavy.
Different heat exchanger designs should be analysed in order to gain a comparative view of how efficient the cross-flow design is in comparison with other standard designs such as the counter-flow exchanger.
Several improvements can be made to the optimization technique. The relationship between heat transfer and Reynolds number needs to be more accurate, also there could be more variables for example material used in construction. Finally if more information was provided on the fans, as stated above, the pressure tolerances could be more exact.
The software used for analysis could be improved. A more powerful programming tool could be used for the optimization.
The selected 'best designs' should be manufactured and tests should be carried out to gain knowledge of how accurate the model is.
Fouling factors should be taken into consideration upon advancement of the project. Catering for fouling would be done with the use of appropriate tabulations.
From the results the following conclusions can be drawn;
The lower power fans are more appropriate for this type of heat exchanger. The capital costs have a negative impact on the payback time, hence only the lower power fans are economically viable.
The louvered fin design is much more efficient and effective that the plain fin design due to larger surface area and increased turbulence.
The effectiveness increases with size of the heat exchanger.
The best design was found be a heat exchanger of width 0.22809m, height 0.22809m and depth 0.65872m utilizing the louvered 10.39 fins, with the 83GW 6pole fan. This design gave the optimum payback time of 2.21 years.