In the financial year ending 31 It is a lot of bad news in one year for the company and the short-term will be a challenging period. However the PLC's long-term future has potential due to acquisitions and growth.
Share prices have risen from the start of the financial year and will continue to rise as the company retains profitability and utilises its recent developments. However prospects are very much dependant on raw material and energy cost returning to a reasonable level. For these reason shareholders have been advised to hold their shares.
It has been concluded that;
The 2005 Annual Report gives a 'true and fair' view.
The 2005 Annual Report is a fair indicator of the past and future financial performance.
The following report contains the following information;
Detailed analysis of Renold PLC's Annual Report for the financial year ending 31
An assessment of the reliability of the report, stating accounting adjustments.
Evidence of how the report gives a true and fair view.
Recommendations to an ordinary shareholder at the end of this financial year.
Analysis of the potential financial future of the company, and evidence of how the Annual Report indicated this future performance.
Data and information was obtained from the 2005 Annual Report, Fame database, financial journals and the World Wide Web.
In order to evaluate the past performance of Renold PLC the following performance indicators will be used;
Factors that may influence performance;
Steel price increase: The company relies heavily on steel as a raw material, and the 40% increase in cost will greatly impair the PLC's performance.
Increasing development in china: Further contracts have been one and there is an increase in the number of local employees. Profit has doubled in comparison to 2004.
Targeting tightly focused business with lower cost base and reduced level of borrowing: Outsourcing production to lower cost economies and the Burton Site rationalisation.
Creation of a UK service centre.
Acquisition of Sachs Automotive France SAS: Provides a platform for the European aftermarket business together with assets and technology.
Weakness of the US Dollar.
Slowing volumes in the automotive business.
Goodwill impairment charge: Jones & Shipman acquisition.
In my opinion a shareholder should hold their shares. The share price is relatively low, and the PLC has recently made some large acquisitions. The company is also restructuring, allowing for a more efficient business in the future. As stated earlier, it is likely that the company have released a lot of bad news in one year, allowing for a larger profit margin to be enjoyed the next year. The steel market is unlikely to get better quickly, "As the dinosaurs of vehicle production thrash round, Renold is too small to avoid getting mauled." The company may also be a target for take-over and so current shareholders will feel the benefits of any takeover. "Much now depends on how quickly the board can restore margins"
From the Annual Report the following information related to the future performance of the PLC can be identified;
The PLC is increasing its development in china.
A more tightly focused business is being developed.  This will enable
The PLC has acquired SAS.  This should provide increased turnover.
The Dollar is restoring some strength.
The steel prices should stabilise.  Hopefully they will then drop, however the Group is not relying on this
A new development in Poland is a possibility  This will support custom and special chains in Europe and is likely to boost turnover.
The European sales structure is being improved  It should also enhance customer service.
Since the annual financial report the following relevant information on the company's performance and future performance has been published;
Steel prices fell until July to about $500/tonne, ~$120/tonne less than at the time of the report  It is expected however that prices will fall again in the next year
Share prices were at their lowest in May and have risen since to a high in December of 62p.
Renold still has not recovered properly from the previous, and in some cases ongoing problems. "Renold is still in intensive care after the triple blow of rising steel prices, a weak US dollar and the problems of the automotive industry - particularly General Motors, which accounts for about half the sales of the automotive division".7
The Burton Site has been sold for The net proceeds will be used to reduce Group borrowings"6.
Henderson Global Investors bought 205,000 shares on the 18/04/2005.
The Group's developments in China have made little headway. From the interim report "Negotiations continue over the establishment of manufacturing operations in China". Opinion is clear, the operations in China need to begin; "...it cannot afford any delays in negotiations to move into China, both to service the Chinese market and to export to Western markets."
The Dollar has gained strength against the Euro. In April the average was 0.772678 EUR to the Dollar, it climbed steadily to peak at 0.848452 EUR to the dollar in November. 8
Information on the PLC's performance and future can be found in the report from the Groups AGM.  However market conditions
Information can also be located in the PLC's interim report published on 12 Interim Report summarises;
Results in line with Board's expectations reflecting impact of continuing high raw material prices and increased utility costs
Operating profit, before exceptional items, was marginally ahead of previous six months at
Loss before tax was
Strong forward order book
Actions to reduce costs on going - Further shift of manufacturing to lower cost countries
Sale of Burton site contracted for at least
The PLC are optimistic, however the same problems are still a threat;
12/12/05) Interim Report:
In conclusion the financial report did contain useful information about the future of the PLC;
The acquisition of SAS has made an immediate impact with
The Dollar grew in strength, which would have been a
The huge increase in steel prices did stop and there was even a decline in price.
However the proposed growth in China has not taken place. This proposal would have encouraged shareholders and investors alike, hence many will be disappointed with the lack of progress. This is likely to be due to the financial problems the Group is experiencing, and perhaps problems with the talks taking place in China.
Important ways that this will affect the firm are highlighted in the Groups released IFRS Update The effects in summary are;
IFRS 1 - First time adoption of IFRS - In accordance with the options available under IFRS 1, at the date of transition the Group will measure its freehold properties on a fair value basis and use this valuation as deemed cost going forward. This will result in a material increase in the value of property in the Group's balance sheet. The basis on which freehold properties are depreciated will be revised from a reducing balance basis to a straight line basis which is considered to be a basis more in line with general practice. The impact of these revisions is not anticipated to have a material change on earnings.
IAS 19 - Employee benefits - Under UK GAAP the Group had adopted Financial Reporting Standard 17 ("FRS 17"). Following the revision made to IAS 19 in December 2004, FRS 17 has many similarities with IAS 19. Therefore, the impact on the Group's net pension scheme liability following the adoption of IAS 19 is limited. There will however be classification changes in the balance sheet, including the treatment of associated deferred tax balances and also there are alternative classifications available for costs within the income statement.
IFRS 3 - Business combinations - Under this standard goodwill is carried at cost and subject to an annual impairment review. Under UK GAAP the income statement suffered a straight line amortisation charge, which will no longer be made. A charge to income will only be required if an impairment is identified.
IFRS 2 - Share based payments - The Group is required for the first time to recognise a charge against operating profit in respect of the estimated fair value of share options granted to employees. IFRS 1 provides an exemption to apply IFRS 2 only to awards made after 7 November 2002 and which will vest after 1 January 2005; this exemption will be adopted by the Group. Whilst a charge against profit will result, following the adoption of this Standard, the amount involved is not considered to be material to the Group's results.
IAS 10 - Events after the balance sheet date - This standard specifically prevents the recognition of a liability in the balance sheet for a dividend declared after the period end. Therefore, the UK practice of recognizing proposed interim and final dividends as liabilities in the respective balance sheets will no longer apply. This is because they do not meet the criteria of a present obligation as defined by IAS 37, the Standard on provisions.
IAS 32 - Financial instruments: Disclosure and presentation and IAS 39 - Financial instruments: Recognition and measurement - As noted above these standards will have no impact on the financial statements of the Group as published prior to 31 March 2005, following the adoption of the exemption provided in IFRS 1. However, from 1 April 2005 the impact of these standards will include a revised treatment in relation to derivative financial instruments. Under UK GAAP the derivative financial instruments used by the Group to manage its currency and interest rate exposures (forward foreign exchange contracts and interest rate swaps) are not recognised in the financial statements until the hedged transaction has itself been recognised. Under IFRS such instruments must be recognised and stated at their fair values. The Group will not adopt hedge accounting for routine hedged transactions under the conditions set out by IAS 39 and therefore changes in the fair values of these instruments will be recognised in the income statement.
IAS 12 - Income taxes - There will be changes to the deferred tax position resulting both from the impact of adopting the IAS 12 and also as a result of the deferred tax consequences of adopting other International Standards as set out above.