While it is certain that the reformation which set off in the twenties of the fifteenth century was preceded by more than a century of humanism challenging, among other things, man's attitude toward theological issues, the extent and influence of the humanist movement are still a matter of debate.
The coming of humanism to Germany virtually coincided with the founding of the first German university in Prague. Professors of the Their slogan Thus, he came to assert: 'Prodigious, immense, and unbelievable is the power of the human mind'. Such linguistic reform the humanists found through 'the observation and imitation of the best authors and writers',
It goes without saying that, by permitting themselves such a new, revisionist outlook, the northern European humanists soon came to criticise what they considered unjustified behaviour within the church and among all Christians in general, be it while viewing themselves inside the religious order and thus without calling into doubt the authority of the church. Erasmus suitably quoted St. Paul in his work
By the time Luther came in conflict with the church, humanism had become well engendered in Germany. But besides the Italian humanist influences of text-based study, German humanists furthermore came to incorporate the creation of a distinct German identity in their writing. Around the turn of the century, several texts were published praising Germany's pious and learned traditions, with at its foundation the rediscovering of Tacitus' The studies of Zwingli in Vienna, the Swiss reformer, coincided with the arrival to that city of Conrad Celtis, Germany's poet laureate, while Luther regarded humanist techniques of philology and the close study of the scriptures as the key to his theological discoveries. Similarly, Calvin, a decade later, would be grounded in the study of It was this 'productive misunderstanding' which made a great controversy out of Luther's theological uneasy with some of the church's practices. Humanists and reformers alike shared many principles which clothed the doctrinal move away from the church in humanist language. Thus, when Luther wrote of his breakthrough in the theory of justification, that '[h]itherto, this epistle has been smothered with comments and all sorts of irrelevances, yet, in essence, it is a brillant light, almost enough to illuminate the whole bible',
Historians have argued that '[t]o a certain extent, the reformers were simply confirming the advances made by the Humanist agenda, with its stress on ancient languages, its tools of exegesis and its approval to the sources'. Consequently, we find that Erasmus freely criticised the incorporation of pagan elements into the Christian faith, and the complicity of the clergy in these practices: 'so it be of ghosts, spirits, goblins, devils, or the like; [...] the further they are from truth, the more readily they are believed and the more do they tickle their itching ears. And these serve not only to pass away time but bring profit, especially to mass priests and pardoners'. 'How much more properly did the apostles call themselves servants of the present Christ', he wrote in an open letter to pope Leo X, 'and not [like the clergy] vicars of an absent Christ?'.
On a note, however, it must be added that much of the question of the relation between humanism and the reformation depends on definition. Kristeller has rightly pointed out that humanism, taken in a broad definition, 'was not [...] Catholic or Protestant, [...] although it is easy to find [for both of them] a certain number of humanists who favoured them'. Naturally, humanist achievements did much to aid reformist criticism of the church, thereby unintentionally damaging the pope's authority as ultimate arbiter of religious matters.
The intellectual life of northern European humanists had brought extensive soil for social development. Influenced by Italian humanists, many German humanists had studied at Italian universities, while extensive correspondence and printed works guaranteed a considerable reading audience to some of the more famous scholars such as Erasmus. While it came to counter the vices of "popular religion", which reformers and humanists alike attacked, it also created a well-publicised stage for a reformed alternative. Simultaneously, too, the reformers managed through humanist channels to justify this transformation. Luther's new doctrine of justification now freed Christians from 'an agreed bargain involving a near-legal sense of obligation',
The spread of these new ideas came hand in hand. While many humanists, trained and educated in Italy, brought up 'questions that [...] were discussed openly and debated in public', 'All classes in Christendom, After all, since Luther refuted the idea that any active works or confession were of any importance in an individual's relationship to God, this discredited the authority of the church as a body of absolute mediation.
To conclude, the role of humanism in preparing the ground enabling a reformation to take place in Germany and the rest of northern Europe was very great. Despite the fact that many a humanist was, and remained, supportive of the church in Rome, the humanist challenges to education, thereby firmly establishing the Moreover, many of the humanist values were shared by the reformation movement. The emphasis on text-based studies was of key importance to Luther ( Indeed, Luther's ideas and style of criticism of the church bore such semblance to humanist traditions, that the first period of clash saw the support of many humanists, which has been described as a 'productive misunderstanding', which, additionally, brought much attention to the Wittenberg disputation through the humanists' extensive correspondence network.
The exact relation between humanists and reformers has been a matter of dispute among scholars of our time. It depends, firstly, on a definition of humanism. While humanism knew certain general traits, it was not necessarily confined by a certain theological outlook, and the humanist movement was never united on theological matters. In fact, the period after the reformation saw the emergence of a number of prominent Protestant humanists. Thus, we can say humanism and reformation were mutually influencing, the reformer often using humanist tools in his pursuits, while many humanists, often demonstratively Teutonic, admired the reformation movement.