The eye is a multi-functional complex tool, that has taken years to understand. Many subsystems such as the lacrimal apparatus have been developed to ensure smooth, efficient use of this body part. Suffice to say, each part had been studied by researchers into extent, which helps us to diagnose, and now treat, many debilitating disorders. On a reasonably small scale, myopia and hyperopia can be corrected easily with glasses, but this has taken a step further with the introduction of laser eye surgery.
Corneal implants can restore sight in patients whose cornea have clouded, likewise, lens replacements can provide a cure for cataracts, a symptom of old age, alcoholism and diabetes.
The most interesting development will be artificial impulse creation, that could enable completely blind and partially sighted individuals to have some sight stimulation. This implant will improve the qualities of lives of countless individuals, and so it is important to further understanding of the optic nerve system, and conversion of these signals to produce an image, within the occipital lobe of the brain.
Vision is a sense that is regarded to be highly valuable. From an early age, children are taught that the human experiences five senses: Touch; Taste; Smell; Sound and Sight. So it is no wonder that it is a subject that attracts much research for development. It is largely appreciated that the human eye is a complex organ, however, with any structure such as this, irregularities and imperfections can occur. The most frequently seen of these are myopia and hyperopia: short-sightedness and long-sightedness. This overview will look at the systems involved with the eye, the issues involved with vision correction, and how it can be hoped for research to develop in the future, so that more people can be given the gift of sight.
I will begin my discussion with a basic anatomy of the eye. Fig. 1. indicates the main areas that are of importance when regarding the eye systems
Each has specific function that helps to maintain the eye. A brief indication of these would be:
The Lens bends the light entering the eye so that it forms an image on the retina at the back of the eye. The lens can change shape because it is held in position by the ciliary body.
The Cornea is a transparent membrane that covers the iris and pupil. It helps to focus the light.
The pupil is the dark hole in the centre of the iris.
The iris is the coloured circular part of the eye. It changes the size of the pupil to allow varying amounts of light to enter the eye.
The retina is at the back of the eye, and contains many receptor cells to sense the light. This sends a signal along the optic nerve to the brain.
The macula is the area that controls our main line of sight. At the centre of it is the fovea, which is where the highest concentration of cells are, in order that we can see in detail.
The sclera is the white part of the eye, which is made up of collagen fibres, and supports the structure.
The vitreous humour maintains the pressure within the eye, so that the structure is supported.
The choroid is a highly capillarised layer, which supplies blood to the retina and the sensory cells.
The optic nerve carries the impulses to the brain to analyse the image.
To follow on from this brief summary, each area of the eye will be discussed individually, in order that the system may be understood.
A recent boom has taken place in popularity of laser eye surgery. Its aim is to reduce dependence upon use of contact lenses and glasses. In the surgery, the actual procedure is to remove some corneal tissue, which alters the shape of the light entering the eye, so that it becomes easier to focus the light on the retina. Unfortunately, this process still has long healing times, but most often is very successful in creating a vast improvement in sight, of sufferers with myopia and hyperopia.
The use of prosthetic lens replacement is being developed by researchers, which would aim to completely remove a distorted lens, and insert a polymer-based material instead. This is due to the repetition of failures in lens transplants. A biological lens does not last for long after the donor has deceased, which means that it is not a viable option.
An interesting field has opened up, into the possibility of artificial impulse creation in subjects that have complete loss of sight. This would involve an implant being attached to the visual association area in the brain, which would have the input of a camera, and its output into the brain would be impulses mimicking those that would have been sent, if the eye was functioning correctly. Some prototypes have been made, but it will be a fair few years until this technology is in circulation.
The eye is a multi-functional complex tool, that has taken years to understand. Many subsystems such as the lacrimal apparatus have been developed to ensure smooth, efficient use of this body part. Suffice to say, each part had been studied by researchers into extent, which helps us to diagnose, and now treat, many debilitating disorders. On a reasonably small scale, myopia and hyperopia can be corrected easily with glasses, but this has taken a step further with the introduction of laser eye surgery.
Corneal implants can restore sight in patients whose cornea have clouded, likewise, lens replacements can provide a cure for cataracts, a symptom of old age, alcoholism and diabetes.
The most interesting development will be artificial impulse creation, that could enable completely blind and partially sighted individuals to have some sight stimulation. This implant will improve the qualities of lives of countless individuals, and so it is important to further understanding of the optic nerve system, and conversion of these signals to produce an image, within the occipital lobe of the brain.