The Materials Testing Laboratory is aimed at allowing the student to develop an understanding of the process of tensile testing. The Testometric Testing Machine is an extremely accurate and valuable piece of equipment, without the likes of which, we would have no perception of materials qualities and technological options for advancement.
This report investigates into 4 materials that are commonly used in biomedical materials science. Low Carbon Steel, Medium Carbon Steel, Aluminium Alloy, and Alloyed Steel, are all used for very different functions, but can these be predisposed by their qualities as proven by this basic exercise?
We use fundamental formulae and results, to rediscover that steel treatments have a great impact on a material's resistance to stresses and load, in the following investigation.
Within medicine, it is important that when materials are considered for use within the body, their properties are fully understood, so that no unexpected behaviour occurs. Mechanical failure could be potentially fatal, if the receiver of this technology is frail or affected by a debilitating disease. For example, an arthritis sufferer's newly fitted replacement hip, could fail at the top of a set of stairs, causing them to fall and severely injure other parts of their body.
In order to understand these properties, thorough materials testing must be initiated. The aim of this set of experiments, is to analyse in some extent, the qualities of some biomedically utilised materials, and to assess how reliable they are for use within the body.
We are going to test the specimens with a tensile testing machine, and make records of their responses. The points we are looking for are the yield point, maximum load stress, and eventual fracture. The data will then be compared to our expectations, and discussed in context.
All of the annotated graphically represented results can be found as appendices.
The Specimens that we will be using are as follows:
It is very difficult to compare my own data, unless I combine it with additional results that have been gathered by a different person. I have chosen the most similar results from a booklet supplied, so that I get a fairer representation of the true results.
The aims of this report were to discuss the laboratory that took place.
At the beginning, I referred to the Objectives as:
The standard tensile test takes place by measuring the reactions of a specimen when placed under load using a Materials Testing Machine. The specifications of which are attached.
The mechanical properties of some important metals used within Biomedical Materials engineering were investigated, and it was found that most of them follow the general rules for their specifications. However, both the Low Carbon Steel and Aluminium Alloys have more unpredictable Yield Stresses, which may mean that they are less suitable for use within the body.
The values for Yield Stress, Tensile Stress and Strain were found, and most frequently were as expected from previous acknowledgments (within the Data Book), but these vary slightly, as the samples have had different heat treatments and processes to prepare them.
The variability between sample was also investigated, as just discussed.
To conclude, it is very important to analyse materials like this, in order that they can be fully understood, before they can be used practically for Biomedical reasons. The differences in how they react, is simulated by the testing machine, and can provide vital insight for researchers to determine their optimum application within the body. Repetitions are important to assess reliability.