Simple Life Ltd, founded in 2005 By  requires 75,000 for the development and initial manufacturing of a tool to aid in the turning of everyday object in the household for sufferers of arthritis, carpel tunnel syndrome and claw hand. This initial investment will be in return for a 20% stake in the company.
The Arthritis Research Campaign state that 4.4 million people in the UK have X-ray evidence of moderate to severe arthritis in their hands [1]. This can be seen as Simple Life's potential market.
A niche product has been designed that is better quality and more aesthetically pleasing than its rivals. Furthermore, unlike the products currently available, the Simple Life tool is universal.
By retailing not only through the internet, but through mail order and high street outlets we aim to quickly gain a firm place in the market.
Current assets stand at 57,000 gathered from family and personal savings.
In three years we aim to be manufacturing 26000 products a year, and have a closing profit of over 89,000.
In ten years, if the current trends continue and Simple life gains just 10% of the market from its main competitor Homecraft Roylan, you will have a five-fold return on your investment .
4.4 million people in the UK have X-ray evidence of moderate to severe arthritis in their hands [1]. Coupled together with the growing number of sufferers of carpel tunnel syndrome and claw hand, this large customer base is expanding year on year.
As can be seen from the diagram on page 6, the majority of the people with arthritic conditions are above the age of 55 (78%), with nearly half the market lying over the age of 65 [1]. The UK population is ageing every year, and it is forecast that the over 65s will account for 23.9% of the UK population by 2031. Hand in hand with this age increase, will be the rise of age related complaints such as arthritis. Hence our market will grow as the company moves towards the future.
plans to sell the business on in 10 years time; even with a 10% share of the total current market, this would relate to a turnover of 2 million per annum, since the market for disability aids at this present date is worth 18.6 million. The revenue will be returned to each shareholder in the ratio 20:30:50 to the Venture Capitalist,  and  respectively. This performance would relate to over five fold return on your initial investment.
At present, Simple Life has 57,000 in savings and family donations. This is used to cover day to day expenditure. It is estimated that a further 75,000 investment is required to develop the product. This will bring assets in the bank to a total of 132,000. Simple Life anticipates producing 450 units in the first year, with sales reaching 400 units. Simple life can manufacture these units at 2.80 each. By selling them at a wholesale price of 12, revenue of 4800 will be generated. Overhead costs (incorporating factors such as salary, training, research and development, marketing and insurance) will be approximately 56,200. Therefore the predicted net loss/deficit in the first year would be 52,520. In a worst case scenario, where only 200 units are sold the net loss would be 58160.
In the second year Simple Life forecasts sales of 7,000 units. This would give 84,000 revenue and a gross profit of 4,520. It is anticipated that sales will peak in winter when the cold exacerbates mobility disabilities. The second fiscal year will prove extremely challenging as Simple Life has set a target of achieving profit by this year. Prudence must be exercised to achieve this, as it is anticipated that Simple Life will have 2,200 debt: 500 of which is in receivable accounts. It is not guaranteed that customers will pay the debt owed to Simple Life. The receivable accounts figure will increase to 1,500 at the end of the third year. Stringent credit checks will be used to counter this and use of a collection agency will minimize the risk from bad debtors.
At the end of the second year Simple Life will have approximately 1,050 units in storage. Sales are expected to rise to 24,700 units in year three: this will increase variable costs and overheads as the rate of manufacture will increase to 26,000 units a year. With increased investment in research and development, this will bring overheads up to 138,082. However, with forecast sales Simple Life will generate a profit of 89,157.
Simple life prides itself on quality innovation, with the hope of "aiding people through technology." Our mentality and focussed ingenuity will make this business a success. A modest outlook has been adopted for the creation of our three year projections. From the great selling points that our product has above the leading competitors, sales could easily surpass our initial predictions. We see a world in which arthritis, claw hand, carpel tunnel syndrome and other hand affecting ailments will no longer inhibit the day to day living of its sufferers. The Simple Life tool will provide this solution.