A 20% stake in the business, SCS Ltd, if being offered in return for a 70,000 investment to allow us to enter the market with our developed system called LiquiSaver.
LiquiSaver is designed to be installed into drinking establishments, and has the ability to stringently measure the volume of free-flow products (lager, cider etc) that have been dispensed by each member of staff.
In many establishments, beer is the biggest selling product but does not provide a high level of profit, thus it is important for a manager to be able to account for all the beer that have been dispensed - this requires stringent methods of measuring stock.
The LiquiSaver provides this method &amp; also records who has dispensed each beverage, allowing for easy detection of bar staff pilfering.
SCS Ltd has a very strong team of four directors from engineering backgrouds, each of whom currently own a 25% stake in the business. They bring experience from a wide range of areas -  manages the company, and brings experience from pub trade management,  is the chief engineer of the project,  &amp;  deal with the financial sector of the business, having worked within several accounting companies.  has strong international business relations because of his experiences and interactions with overseas companies.
We have identified a niche in the UK dispense monitoring market for a system that not only measures that drinks dispensed, but moreover, recognises each member of staff. We have recognised that a system would be of great benefit to establishments with many members of staff &amp; are thus focusing our marketing towards students' union bars.
As present, we are operating the business from home &amp; carry out all of the field work ourselves (consultations, installations &amp; aftersale service) as we do not require the facilities of dedicated premises nor extra members of staff. Once the buiness begins to grow &amp; demand for the product increases, we shall relocate the business &amp; employ members of staff to help with the everyday operations
Because of the highly differentitated nature of the system that we have developed, we predict excellent returns on your investment, with an expectance to break even after the sale of 17 units - which roughly equates to 3 complete student unions installations. We furthermore predict that a profit of 100,000 will be reached after the sale of 90 units.
SCS Limited is a small company that was set up in June 2006. The four directors; , ,  &amp; , currently own 100% of the company (25% each), however, we are offering 20% of the firm's shares in return for a 70,000 investment in the company. The remaining 80% of the firm's equity would be divided equally between the four current directors.
The 'LiquiSaver' system, the current project that SCS Ltd has been developing since it began, is a stock control system for free-flow products. We have come up with a feasible design for our product and have applied for the patent for the current design. We have contacted foreign contractors for the production of our device and they have agreed to proceed with our design after the feasibility study.
The "LiquiSaver" system has been developed with the needs of the customer in mind. We noticed a gap in the UK dispense monitoring market for product that not only measures the volume of beverages dispensed, but furthermore recognises by whom they have been dispensed. The system consists of three main parts: flow meters, the processing hardware that provides the manager with a printout of the day's activity and an I.D. checking systems.
The flow meters are a cruicial component of the sytem &amp; are designed to be connected in line of the keg and font in order to measure the volume of beverage that has been dispensed. The I.D. checking system restricts flow through the fonts unless the bartender signifys, by means of either a swipe card or an electromatic plastic ring that is worn on a finger, that he requires use of the font - this derestricts the beer's flow allowing the drink to be dispensed. The CPU registers how much and by whom the beverage was sold.
LiquiSaver was developed for establishments that have a great number of staff, making it difficult to track pilfering without registering by whom the beer was sold. The main niche that we developed the product for is campus based students' unions.
Before we develop a new product and see the need for better services we first need the existing product to mature positively in this market where unexpected problems could arise quickly. Once the product has reached stable sales, profit targets and generated additional cash for a new investment opportunity then additional parts and new parts will be produced and tested.
The new product range we have in mind is an optic dispensed spirit control, line cleaning &amp; temperature checks for the system.
Our operations and decision making process will be carried in the main premises based in the UK.
At the first stage we think that we are going to be based in one of our residential premises in order to avoid the high cost of renting or leasing a large office.
Therefore our current operations capacity in the UK will be 4 people. The production process and the allocation of its capacity will be done by our sub contractors.
Later on once the company is stable and profitable we think to lease a business office which is located in a large business site. Additionally once there is a higher demand of our products then we will consider working with larger sub contractors.
In terms of personal as I mentioned before there will be 4 people in total. Once we move to bigger premises we would be able to employ more staff depending on the workload and in the areas of need.
Our communication to our customers and suppliers will be carried through the internet and telephone. All our calculations and plans are done using special programs on our notebooks. Later on once we have the opportunity to move to an office we will invest in IT facilities.
SCS Ltd is current operated from 's home address in Lemington Spa, shire.  mainly manages the company as the company director and the other members of the board of directors provide the best possible support to smoothly drive the company to its goals satisfying our supplier and customer needs. The management team consists of members with the necessary skills required for the smooth flow of the company. Since all members are engineers the project's technical division would be a surplus. The financial sector and the marketing sector would be covered since  and  have had past work experience and have specialised in these sectors. The international business would be covered by  because of his international experiences and interactions.
(Company president), is mainly responsible for the overall management of the firm and the other members of the board of directors look up to him as a good leadership.
(Chief engineer), is dedicated mainly to manufacturing our product, design and assembly.
(Research analyst), is responsible for developing our current product with new technology and additions. He is responsible for marketing sector of the product to a certain degree.
(Human resource and finance manager), is mainly responsible for the well being of the co-workers and the financial sector of the firm.
Typical risks that may be faced by the company upon start-up are as follows:
An insufficient amount of time may have been predicted for start-up processes. This risk may be reduced by utilising the seasonality of the company's activity - the quiet periods during university term time can be employed to orientate &amp; prepare the business for periods of high level of activity.
Inaccuracies in financial forecasts, which could lead to cash flow problems. By pitching our sales price high, underestimations in financial forecasts will be absorbed by this high margin.
Offering discounts because of the temptation of revenue. This risk must be minimised by staying focused as a business, to maintain a high level of maturity - strong profit margins &amp; a healthy cash flow are more beneficial to the company than volume of sales.
Pressure on the management to have to cope with every aspect of the business, which could lead to a loss of focus on the original plan. The diverse range of experience (including production processes, leadership ability &amp; experience in running drinking establishments) that the management bring to the company mean that we know &amp; can familiarise ourselves with the business market that we are entering, which will allow us to remain focused &amp; manage ourselves through the situations that we are likely to encounter.
Promotional strategy may not be as effective as originally hoped, although the risk is reduced as we shall be mostly pitching the product directly to the businesses &amp; the promotional strategy is not crucial.
Time to establish relationships with suppliers may be greater than initially anticipated &amp; may furthermore cause an issue where credit for the business is concerned. The reliability &amp; quality of suppliers may cause concern; however, by building up relationships over long periods of time, we hope to benefit from loyalty.
Receiving money from customers. Being a new business, our bargaining position is not yet strong, however, this risk is reduced by the fact that we are targeting a niche of students' unions who have established themselves over a length of time as professional organisations, as opposed to pitching our product to rough &amp; disreputable venues.
Time, cost &amp; availability may cause problems when it comes to finding premises. Upon start-up the business will not be in any great need for premises - for the first few projects, the ability to operate from home will alleviate this requirement. Once the business establishes itself, the need to obtain premises to operate from will be such that we shall transfer operations. Such a time will not be for some time, allowing us time, as &amp; when necessary to find a suitable location.
The current design of the LiquiSaver is a feasible design which allows the company to proceed with the project. We have submitted the necessary documentation for the patent which is pending. The design of the flow meters, the CPU with the wireless connections and the design for the sensors are finalised. The main objective would be to develop the current design and bring in state of the art technology to our product.
The main objective of the finance department and the company as a whole is to succeed in bringing business angels to invest 70,000 in our firm for 20% of the company as equity. The company plans to achieve a net profit of about 100,000 by the end of our first business year.
The Company is fully managed by our board of directors and each member of the board of directors currently has an equal share (25%) in the company. We plan to employ more staff after we expand which would require a new business property when the work load increases with time.
We currently have contacted our foreign suppliers for the purpose of production of our device. We previewed our design to the foreign suppliers after applying for the patent and they have agreed with the design and proved that it is feasible to proceed with the plan. Our main objective would be to have a healthy relationship with our international suppliers which would emphasize on reliability, Quality, value for money and financial security.