The basic objective of the laboratory sessions was to use Solidworks and Cosmos Floworks to design a car in a wind tunnel and to analyse the properties such as the drag coefficient and drag force. The idea behind these laboratory sessions was to gain knowledge about basic concepts of fluid dynamics and car aerodynamics. This laboratory assisted in gaining a basic idea about analysis and optimisation.
A car was fitted in to a wind tunnel and all the external specifications were provided. Then the car was analysed for different properties by varying the external entities.
A car and a wind tunnel is designed using Solidworks. Then he original car was mated in to a closed wind tunnel using Solidworks and then Cosmos Floworks was added in. Using a wizard available in Cosmos Floworks the external entities such as temperature and pressure were defined. Then the surfaces of the car were mentioned on which the air acts.
Solver was then used to calculate the X - component of force by carrying out several iterations.
The original car used for the initial calculations is shown below;
The Modified car used for the initial calculations is shown below;
Following data was specified before carrying out the iteration calculations;
The iteration calculations are carried out for six different velocities of air (10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60 m/s)
The general data used for derivation and calculation of drag coefficients;
(Where;  = density, V = velocity, A=area of the car)
The drag forces for six values of velocity are found and using the equation shown in the "Theory used" the respective Drag coefficient is found. Then one graph is plotted for each car, with Drag coefficient against velocity.
Calculating the Drag coefficient;
(Above is an example calculation of a drag coefficient)
According to the results from the two cars it could be stated that Drag coefficient is independent of the velocity of air. Since the Drag forces and drag coefficients found in the Modified car was less than the values found in the original car, it could be derived that the modified car is more aerodynamic. The modified car has less Drag forces with the different velocities and the difference between the Drag coefficients of the two cars is roughly about '0.05'.
Below are some additional ways of interpreting properties such as pressure;
Using the software used for this laboratory various other entities such as static pressure dynamic and pressure could be measured and interpreted.