The Objective of the experiment was to use the given apparatus to measure the experimental value of the moment of inertia of various discs using suitable measurements &amp; graphs and finally comparing it with the theoretical values.
The Apparatus consisted of a wooden plate with a drum with a helical groove on one side and a disc holder n the other side. There was a string attached to the drum and the string could be wound around the groove. The other side of the string had a lasso which could be used to suspend weights.
A disc was attached to the holder and various weights were suspended on it. They were allowed to fall from the maximum possible height and the time they took to fall to the ground was measured using a stopwatch. This process was performed on two different discs with different radii. Then a graph was plotted between the mass suspended against the reciprocal of the square of the time taken to fall to the ground. The slope of the line of best fit obtained in the graph was used experimental value of the moment of inertia of the disc using Newton's equations of motion. This value was then compared with the theoretical value of moment of inertia obtained using the Formula
The experimental error was then judged using the difference in the values obtained. The percentage error was found to be very high and hence I personally don't think that this method can effectively measure the moment of inertia of the discs.
The Purpose of the experiment was to analyse and judge the accuracy of the experimental measurement of the moment of inertia of a disc using the given apparatus.
The word INERTIA is defined as the inability of a body to change by itself its state of rest or of uniform motion which is an effect of its mass or can be considered as the mass itself. The rotational equivalent of this inertia is called the moment of inertia or the second moment of mass. The expression for the moment of inertia can be derived as follows.
The Linear velocity of a body (v) is the product of the radius or distance from the axis of rotation (r) and the angular velocity (w).
The kinetic energy of this rotating object is hence
The total kinetic energy in the body is the sum of the individual energy of all the particles contained in it.
Looking at this equation in a rotational context, the angular velocity replaces the linear velocity in the linear context and the summation replaces the mass in the rotational context and is better known as the moment of inertia.
Hence
Since the summations are similar to integrals. In order to derive an integral equation for the moment of inertia
Let us divide the body into a number of smaller pieces of equal mass 
m.The summation now gives the value of I but it still wouldn't be as accurate as the integral hence let us divide the body into a number of infinitely small particles of mass dm.Hence the integral equation for I would be
This integral equation can now be used to derive a linear equation for the moment of inertia of a disc that we are going to work on in this experiment.
A disc can be considered as a cylinder in 3 dimensions. Hence
If 
is the density of the of the cylinder and V be the volume of the cylinder then,
Since volume of a cylinder in 2rh, expressing the volume as a function of the radius with a constant height
Substituting this value in the initial integral and solving it
Since the density is the ratio of the mass and volume.
Substituting this in the new integral,
This is the theoretical derivation of the value of the moment of inertia of a disc.
Hence
Every individual disc was tested with 5 different weights and the experiment was repeated thrice for every single weight. The graph was then plotted between 1/t2 and mass. Excel was then used to draw the line of best fit and generate a linear equation for the line of best fit in the form of y = mx + c.The value of m represents the slope of the graph which in other words is the value of mt 2.Shown below is the table of readings and corresponding graphs for the two discs used for experimentation.
This table represents the readings of the large disc of radius 7.6 cm and mass 0.696 kg.
This table represents the readings of the small disc of radius 5.05 cm and mass 0.314 kg.
Thus from the equation of the line of best fit obtained from the graphs above
For the large disc,
Slope of the line =
For the small disc,
Slope of the line =
From the formula derived to obtain the value of I from the experiment in the Theory section of this report,
The values of the other terms were measured
g = 9.8 m/s 2
r = 7.6 cm for large and 5.05cm for small
s = vertical displacement of weights = 30 cm
Hence,
The Moment of Inertia I for the large disc (Experimental)=
The Moment of Inertia I for the small disc (Experimental) =
The theoretical value of the Moment of Inertia of a disc is calculated by the formula
Hence
The Moment of Inertia I for the large disc (Theoretical)= 20.1 * 10 -4
The Moment of Inertia I for the small disc (Theoretical) =4.003 * 10 -4
The disc has to be well lubricated to avoid errors due to friction
Choose a fairly inextensible string that doesn't stretch a lot when pulled.
The weights holder should be as light as possible but should still be string and durable enough to perform it's functions.
An automated sensor that senses the start and fall of the weights will reduce the error caused due to human reaction time.
This instrument can be much more effective if other existing but inevitable sources of error like friction, tension of string, reaction speed of person measuring the time, etc can be known so that we get a much more accurate value. The values obtained in this method seem to have a high percentage error and are inconsistent. The accuracy also depends a lot on the instrument being used. Various specimens of this same type of instrument can produce results with a strikingly high variation in them. Hence I think the moment of inertia is best measured using theoretical approaches.