This Project involves a study of the aerodynamics of a car designed using solidworks and tests its aerodynamic factors and then make informed decisions on the improvements that can be made in the car to improve its aerodynamic performance.
The Study of aerodynamics aims at reducing the drag force of a body moving in a Fluid.
Every Moving Car is acted upon by two types of resisting forces.
The resistance to tyre treads motion due to the friction and inertia. It is directly proportional to the mass of the car and the coefficient of friction of the surface
The resistance to forward motion due to the viscous force of the air. It is directly proportional to the Frontal area and velocity of the car.
Ref:
The Second type of resisting force is what the study of aerodynamics aims to reduce and is called the drag force. Thus when a car moves in air. The air tends to push the car along the direction in which it flows across the car hence impeding its forward motion and also reducing its acceleration.
Thus Aerodynamics aims at designing the car such that it offers least resistance to the flow of air across it and reduces the drag force caused due the viscosity of the air.
Thus aerodynamic car design improves the economy, Handling, Comfort and hence the Safety of the Car.
The influence of the drag force on these various aspects of the Car increases with increasing velocity of the car
Note: The Velocities that are discussed about in this report essentially mean the relative velocity between the wind and the Car.
The project on Car Aerodynamics involved designing a car on Solidworks, Putting it in a wind tunnel with a fairly large cross section and length avoiding point contact between them. It was then tested for it's drag force for various relative velocities of 10 - 60 m/s.After the measurements were done, the car was modified on a few aspects for better aerodynamics and put through the same tests again. I chose an Audi TT as my Model for simulation and it was designed fairly to scale
The drag forces and drag coefficients were observed to be very high for the original car and it was reduced considerably by making a few improvements in the car.
The Drag coefficient was found to reducing gradually with velocity while the drag force was found to be increasing with velocity. With increase in velocity, there would be an obvious increase in the Reynolds Number and hence we can arrive at the conclusion that the aerodynamics of the car improves when the air flow gets more turbulent.
Refer Appendix for Tables and Values
The Blue Lines show the readings of the original design and the pink lines show the readings of the improved design.
Thus the improvements made on the car showed significant improvements in the aerodynamic performance of the car.