The objective of this lab session was to get familiarised with the various methods that are used to study the microstructure of materials. We
We used different instruments to analyse the microstructure of materials. We used The Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM), The Optical Microscope and The X-Ray Diffraction Machine. We also familiarised ourselves with a high precision weighing machine and a hot polymer/ceramic pressing machine while making samples to X-Ray Diffraction.
We looked at the various crystal structures of materials using these instruments. We compared and analysed various crystal properties like Size, Shape, Distribution, frequency of constituent elements in alloys, Properties like Twinning in the case of Brass, etc.
The estimations made using the microscopes were pretty approximate and vague as the imaging software couldn't detect the crystals on its own and we had to make rough measurements of the sizes. The measurement of crystal sizes on the microscope we a very approximate estimation as well.
We analysed the Microstructure of the given materials using three different instruments
Vibrations and thermal expansion: Since electron microscopes resolve samples to a nanometre resolution, the effects of the vibrations in the environment and the expansion sue to the heat produced by the electron beams; etc could cause errors in the images.
Impurities in X-Ray Diffraction Samples: The samples observed using the X-Ray Diffractometer could be contaminated by impurities while handling it and by the atmosphere.
Since we use the optical microscope to get an optical perspective of the crystals and don't make any measurements, errors don't make a significant impact. Besides there shouldn't be any errors associated with optical microscopy anyway.
All the instruments used to analyse and study the microstructure of materials were unique and served their own purposes.
The Simple optical microscope was extremely useful in getting a basic perspective of the shape, distribution and phases of materials in a specimen. This information can easily be related to its physical and chemical properties. It can also help us understand the extraction and manufacturing processes involved with the materials and can aide us in optimising them.
The Scanning electron microscope was extremely useful in looking at structure in details and understanding the grain sizes and looking at the grain boundaries in detail. The actual mechanisms involved with strengthening materials like interstitional or substitutional filling of atomic planes can be studies in greater detail under an SEM. The understanding of pore sizes and pore distribution in HAP and the understanding of the crystal sizes of the bone tissues has helped in designing better biomaterials for orthopaedic implants.
X-Ray diffraction is an excellent method to understand the crystal structure and the atomic spacing in crystals. However a lot of calculations and computational power is required to put the data obtained from this test to proper use.