The Objective of this Laboratory session was to test the given samples of biomaterials using a materials testing machine. The materials underwent tensile testing in the process of which a Load-Elongation Plot was obtained for each of these materials. This plot is characteristic and unique for every material.
The Specimens are gripped on to the machine using chucks. The machine uses a motor to drive two lead screws on either side. These push the chuck upwards thereby stretching the specimen. The Force applied is measured using a load cell or a strain gauge and the extension is measured using an extensometer or a transformer in which the distance between the coils can be adjusted. A computer measures these values at regular small intervals and plots them as a graph.
This graph is then used to obtain an engineering Stress- Strain curve of the material. This plot can then be used to determine the yield points, Ultimate Tensile Strength, Fracture Stress and Ductility of these materials.
These values are then compared against tests done previously in the university and other statistical data provided to understand the fluctuations in the values and errors.
The principle of the testing is the load and elongation plots obtained from the stress and elongation test. The objective of the experiment was to obtain the characteristic Load Elongation plots of given materials using physical tests on a material testing machine. These characteristic plots were used to obtain the stress-strain curve of materials. This in turn will enable us to determine the yield point, the ultimate tensile strength and the ductility of the materials. These values were then compared with previous tests done in the university on the same materials and other statistical information provided to asses the fluctuations and analyse the causes for these fluctuations.
Every Material experiences deformation when a load is applied on it. The deformation can either be elastic or plastic. The material also fractures or fails at a certain point. The Load applied can be in the form of tension, compression, shear, etc.It this case we only study the response of the given samples of biomaterials when they are subjected to tension. Every material has a characteristic load and elongation plot that can be obtained from a tensile stress test. Fig 1 shows the general structure of the plot obtained during tensile testing.
Where Stress measured is the engineering stress or in other words, the reduction in the cross sectional area during strain is not taken into account
As we can see from Fig 1 above, the plot takes the form of a straight line in the beginning, this zone is known as the elastic limit where the material undergoes temporary or This essentially means that the material will return back to its original length is the load is removed anywhere in this Zone. This is a result of the stretching of the atomic bonds in the specimen. The point at which the material ceases to deform elastically is called yield point. The line on the graph is not linear beyond this point.
The value of stress at the upper limit of this Straight line is called the yield point beyond which the material undergoes permanent or This is a result of the sliding of atomic layers with relative to one another. Once Plastic Strain is achieved, the elongation is irreversible. The total strain would hence be the sum of the elastic and plastic strain.
In some metals like steel, the Figure 2 is a stress strain plot of soft steel. This is because the yield strength of these materials is quite sensitive to how axially the load is applied. Hence the uppermost point of the wavy region is called the Metals also have some weird effects after this as a result of work hardening.
After the material starts undergoing plastic deformation, the cross sectional area of the specimen starts narrowing down rapidly at a point. This point is known as a neck and this effect is called necking. As more load is applied on the specimen, the atomic bonds break around this neck and the specimen fractures into two different pieces eventually. This phenomenon is called a . Figure 3 is a graphical representation of elastic and plastic deformation, necking and stress concentration changes that occur during the process.
The point of fracture in the material is determined by the location of the defect in the material which in turn is governed by the extraction, manufacturing and heat treatment processes that the specimen undergoes and it's almost impossible to make the specimen perfect such that the fracture occurs exactly in between the two ends of the vertical section
The Nature of the Stress Strain curve for materials depends not only on the nature of the material but also on heat treatment, prior history of plastic deformation, and the strain rate, temperature, etc. Hence while trying to obtain a standard value of Ultimate Tensile Strength, Yield Point, fracture point , etc of materials, it is essential for us to use the optimum value for these factors.
The Graphs obtained from this testing can also be used to measure the ductility of materials. Ductility is the permissibility of materials to be drawn into wires. In other words, it's the ratio of the total plastic extension of the specimen and its original length.
The Process of measuring the Tensile Strength of materials is quite simple. The instrument has to be setup in order to
The Machine is then started which makes the upper chuck move upwards as it elongates the specimen. The Load and elongation signals are sent to a computer that plots the values on a screen. The machine stops automatically when the specimen gets fractured. The load-elongation plot of the material can then be printed out from the computer.
 This could affect the value of the measured strain.
 This heat could affect the elasticity and plasticity of the materials. The energy lost to the environment is also not taken into account. The ambient temperature could also cause a change in the shape of the plot.
 Although this is neglected in most cases, there's is some amount of error caused by it. In my observation of graphs, the slope of the curve seems to reduce with increase in strain rate. This could happen because, when the material is deformed slowly, the molecules have more time to interact within themselves and increase their cohesive forces but rapid deformation reduces their interaction time and hence speeds up the process.
Table 1, given below is a brief description of the specimens tested including their composition, manufacturing process, Codes, etc. This Data was obtained from the Lab briefing Sheet.
These Specimens were made in batches to make different samples match the same values. This also reduces the distortion caused by heat treatment, manufacturing processes, impurities, defects, etc. These specimens were also made to standard sizes. The cross sectional area and gauge lengths of the different samples are specified in Table 2 on the next page.
These values obtained from the load elongation plots can be used to obtain the engineering stress strain plot values. The load divided by the cross sectional Area gives the value of stress and the elongation value divided by the gauge length gives us the strain value. This is done in Table 3 below.
During the determination of these values from the graph, a proof stress line was drawn from an elongation value of 0.2% of the gauge length to be as parallel as possible to the elastic line. The point at which this line intersected the curve was taken to be the yield point.
These Stress and Strain values can now be used to plot the characteristic Stress and Strain plot of materials as done in the successive pages.
The Values in the statistical information table above are the data corresponding to the maximum and minimum yield stress of the various tests done during a particular year. The Average of this value has been used to plot a statistical graph below to show the variations in the values of some key parameters like Yield Strength and Tensile Strength over time.
With the testing of metallic materials, we found aluminium alloys (E) to be more elastic than iron alloys like steel (DN). Aluminium alloys had a high elastic strain or in other words a lower stiffness when compared with steel. This explains why aluminium is considered to be a soft metal.
We found steels to be quite sensitive to the axial alignment of the deforming force. The Load-Elongation plots of steels hence tend to be quite wavy with too many spikes as the plot approaches the yield point. Steels also tend to have an upper and lower yield point.
The tensile stress readings of polymeric material, Nylon 6, 6 were observed to be quite sensitive to changes in strain rate. On one hand, while lower strain rates take an awfully long time to fracture the specimen, higher strain rates fracture it too fast. This is due to the viscoelastic property of the polymers. This resulted in a way load-elongation plot for this material.
As with composites like the GFRC we used, they tend to have a very low elastic limit or in other words their elastic strain is quite low. Their plastic limit is a lot higher.
When the results that we obtained were compared with the Graph Set A, Graph set B (Tests done in the university on the same materials previously) and statistical data provided to us in the lab. I found a general dip in most values recorded as compared to the previous years. There are 2 factors that I can account this phenomenon to
The Tensile Testing of materials is very essential and critical in order to understand the behaviour of materials under tension. A lot of engineering applications use materials under tension like bridges, springs, etc.This test seem to be extremely sensitive with respect to factors concerning the machine and factors concerning the material. Defects, Impurities and crystal structure variations introduced in the material as a result of heat treatment play an important role in determining the shape of the characteristic plots. On the other hand slips at the chucks, calibration errors, axial alignment, etc are factors concerning the machine that play an important role in determining the shape of the plot. This has led to great variations in the statistical records of these characteristic curves. This test can also be used to determine the Young's Modulus and the creep of different materials.
Real Engineering applications however use a safety factor which quite often doubles or triples the strength of the materials used than what is actually required for the particular application. However, these tests help us in understanding the big picture of the material properties which is what it is used for.