The concept of burden-sharing in the context of forced migration raises a host of questions that ultimately spring from the question of what to do and how to deal with 'strangers' in our midst. The Preamble of the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (hereafter the '1951 Convention') acknowledges that "the grant of asylum may place unduly heavy burdens on certain countries," and hence "a satisfactory solution of a problem of which the United Nations has recognized the international scope and nature cannot therefore achieved without international co-operation." This short statement raises a myriad number of questions such as what does it mean to have an 'unduly heavy burden'? What is the threshold of such a burden? What kind of 'solution' is envisaged and does it entail monetary compensation, or other forms of compensation? Is international co-operation a binding legal obligation, or simply an ethical one?
This paper focuses in the first part of this essay on the status of claims about justice that were voiced during the drafting of the Convention in the discussion of the notion of 'unduly heavy burden.' In the second part of this essay I analyze recent literature on burden-sharing examine the Tampa boat crisis as a case study where a large of refugees brought to the forefront questions relating to burden-sharing. Finally, I comment on Santos' proposition of a transnational conception of burden-sharing
The term 'burden-sharing' was not used in the Convention, or in the drafting process. Instead, the notion of 'unduly heavy burden' was inserted in the Preamble by the French delegation with the desire to express "the great human importance of the refugee problem," the need to tackle the refugee problem "in a generous spirit", and to emphasize that the problem "could only be solved " The question that emerges is why are solely legal considerations insufficient to solve the problem? Could a purely legal resolution to the problem possibly result in an Does justice here refer to justice on behalf of the plight of refugees, or justice on behalf of host countries taking in refugees? How may an ethical policy, if ethics should enter into the framework at all, be constructed in terms of refugee law?
The issue of justice with regards to the refugee situation is interesting for a number of reasons, one of them being the fact that one must think of justice not as a bounded concept within a particular community or nation, but of justice on a global or international scale simply because refugee flows inevitably traverse territorial boundaries, particularly in the case of massive displacement where refugees often spill across the borders of several countries. Debra Satz's remark that "humanity's claims are international" and that "neither nationality nor state boundaries, as such, have moral standing with respect to questions of justice" She adds that one of the main challenges facing contemporary cosmopolitanism is the tension between global justice and "territorially based forms of democratic government" and that unless the latter is restrained in certain instances, such as closed border exclusion, people will be left vulnerable to human rights violations.
However, as Gregor Noll points out, "migration control is traditionally regarded as...the personal sovereignty of a state" and it is "doubtful whether international law obliges states to share the burdens of reception." While massive displacements of people should invite us to think about our responsibilities towards them, what exactly our obligations are is not clear. As will be shown below, recognition of responsibility was not matched by an explicit commitment detailing what actions needed to be taken to uphold this responsibility.
The commentary on the
On the international level, the writings of Hathaway/Neve Hathaway and Neve propose allocating the physical and financial burdens of protecting refugees through 'sub-global associations' of states composed of inner and outer core groups in a kind of insurance scheme. Inner core states are those specifically, and outer core states are generally not immediately affected by refugee flows and so contribution will largely take the form of fiscal support and the provision of permanent resettlement for a small number of cases who cannot return home. Refugees will reside largely in their region of origin with respect of their fundamental human rights, and the goal is eventual repatriation once conditions are safe. States could then trade their quotas by paying other participating states to fulfill their obligations.
On the regional level on the European Union, Noll Noll approaches the problem by analyzing risk distribution along a game-theoretical approach, focusing initially on two host states that are negotiating the sharing of burden, and then expanding to involve other actors, highlighting how risks are shifted among players in "criss-crossing alliances." Noll argues that states adopt four main strategies to externalize costs and risks: shifting costs onto other states through a burden-sharing scheme that presumes agreement on cooperation based on expectation of reciprocity; pushing refugees to other countries, for example, through safe-third country agreements; preventing migration altogether; and significantly reducing asylum seeker's rights on one's territory.
One of the main criticisms leveled against Hathaway/Neve and Schuck on the practicality of their schemes is that the transfer payments from North to South are unlikely to materialize once refugees are contained in the South. Smith has also argued that out-sourcing obligations to other states would have the added effect of "muffling...these voices that educate us to the persecution in their homelands." The criticisms raise some consensus over the moral and ethical issues of such burden-sharing proposals, pointing out how they fail to recognize the humanitarian element that underpins, or at least should underpin, the provision of asylum.
The In August 2001, over 400 mostly Afghan asylum seekers were stranded on the Norwegian freighter There were reports of illness among refugees, and conditions on the ship were cramped as it was only designed to hold 30 crew. In the end, an agreement was reached for 150 asylum-seekers to have their claims assessed in New Zealand, and the rest in the Pacific Island State of Nauru.
What went wrong with burden-sharing in the Was there a case to be made for Australia's "national interest" to trump humanitarian concerns? Or did the Australian government fail to even extend the right to hospitality as outlined by Kant's It appears that the Australian government preferred to pursue the strategy of pushing refugees onto others as outlined by Noll. The Australian government signed Memorandums of Understanding with Papua New Guinea and Nauru in October 2001 and December 2001 respectively to host more asylum seekers intercepted by the Australian Navy.
 Taylor points out that because there was "no clear legal obligation" on states to take the responsibility for these rescuees at sea, Australia "took advantage of this lack of clarity" by insisting that responsibility for them lay elsewhere.
In light of the inequity of the current international system that has placed enormous burdens on already vulnerable countries, Santos asks whether burden-sharing should "be conceived on a global scale? And will this be possible in an interstate system based on state self-centredness?" He suggests that "a new and more solidary transnational conception of burden sharing" ought to be implemented, arguing that in the future, environmental catastrophes will be a major cause of displacement, thus exposing "the dark side of capitalist world development and global lifestyles," and making environmental refugees the ideal candidates for this new transnational conception of burden-sharing.
However, regional schemes also fail to acknowledge that "many of the conflicts leading to mass refugee flows in recent years can themselves be traced either to the legacy of imperialist politics or to its pursuit in the contemporary era," and hence the large number of states in Africa hosting refugees would benefit from a global rather than regional burden-sharing scheme. Such a discussion is not entirely different from those raised about global justice and poverty
Suhrke has stated that, "in refugee matters, the logic of burden-sharing starts from the premise that helping refugees is a jointly held moral duty and obligation under international law." However, the practical realities of burden-sharing have shown that most states, particularly those of the North, would prefer to shift their obligations and responsibilities onto others whenever possible rather than recognize the words of Grahl-Madsen who said that,