This laboratory session was regarding the construction, working and use of pneumatic circuits and its limitations. The features of these circuits were studied using "Pneumate" Basic Pneumatic Trainer assembly panel supplied by SMC Pneumatics (UK) Ltd. The trainer uses air to actuate the pneumatic values as its ease of use and safe.
In the exercises performed the behaviour of pneumatic actuators and the working of directional control values, check valves were learned. By using the theory learned in the course calculations to predict the speed and force of pneumatic actuators were carried out to be 11.31N and the accuracy of the results was discussed considering that in real life nothing is 100% efficient. The results obtained were almost as required, but some varied due to time delay.
Care had to be taken of the type of air used in the circuits. Compressed air with less moisture and filtered so that no impurities like oil, dust, dirt, etc should be used. Pneumatic actuators can perform linear and rotary motion very easily and hence have many applications than electrical actuators.
Applications of compressed air are limitless, from optician's gentle use of low pressure to measure fluid pressure in the human eyeball, the multiplicity of linear and rotary motions in robotic mechanisms, to high force required for concrete breaking pneumatic drills. For the exercises carried out, they can also be used for the operation of automatic doors, to press parts into a die, stamper with a parts feeder and ejection mechanism.
(6)'The main aim of the laboratory and the learning outcome were the following:
Understand the basic principles pneumatics, it limitations and potential for practical applications
Create, test and understand the pneumatic circuits and its working
Compare pneumatic actuation advantages and disadvantages and control to similar mechanical and electrical systems
Apply theory studied in course to carry out fluid calculations to predict speed and force of pneumatic actuators.
Use engineering drafting packages (such as Microsoft Visio) to create pneumatic circuit diagrams'
In order to know the experiment better, we need to know the basics of pneumatics. (1)'A fluid power system is one that transmits and controls energy through the use of pressurized liquid or gas. In Pneumatics, this media is air. This of course comes from the atmosphere and is reduced in volume by compression, thus increasing its pressure.' (2)'Pneumatic systems operate on the basis of gas being compressed under extremely high pressure and then contained within a special storage tank. This gas is then made to rapidly expand by being released into a separate chamber. The chamber is connected to a rod or cylinder that pushes outward when the gas expands, thereby bringing about the energy required to perform specified task'. The correct use of pneumatic control requires an adequate knowledge of pneumatic components and their function to ensure their integration into an effective working system. For this experiment we need to know the working of pneumatic actuators (single acting and double acting), directional control and check valves, some basic notations of pneumatic components and their interpretations.
All the exercises performed give almost the same result as required. In exercise 1 it was noticed that when 0.1MPa was used as air supply the transfer of output was slow and when 0.2MPa was used it was fast. This was because of high pressured air was supplied which have more energy. In exercise 2 even though sometimes both switches were pressed together the output changed, as it was hard to press them both together at once. In exercise 3 the Boolean logic equations obtained for A+ and A- were 
 and 
. Hence it proved that the OR gate function was performed. In exercise 4 the Boolean logic equations obtained are 
 and 
. In exercise 5, the phase diagram obtained was not same as the expected one. Here, when cylinder A is fully extended it causes cylinder B to extend when cylinder A retracts, cylinder B takes a little time to retract. This is because switch S3 needs to set off first affecting the retraction of cylinder B. Overall the exercises performed had very less error.
The dimensions of the cylinders used in the experiment were 12mm diameter, 80mm stroke for double acting cylinder, 50mm stroke for single acting cylinder. Now, the pneumatic cylinder force can be calculated.
Here
As
Here diameter of both single acting and double acting cylinder are same. Hence,
(8)'But for the reverse stroke of the piston, the available surface area is decreased by the area of the piston rod. In that case:
Note this does not account for inefficiencies in the actuator due to friction between the piston and the cylinder wall, the piston rod and the packing gland, etc. For our purposes, these factors contribute to an approximate 5% loss in efficiency (i.e. the practical force available from the piston is about 95% of the calculated force).
Next, to know how much force is required to move the required object, required force needs to be calculated. To determine the Required Force, the mass of the object to be moved, the direction of motion relative to gravity, and the effects of any friction between the object to be moved and whatever is supporting it should be known. To calculate the required force:
where G is the mass of the object to be moved, a is the angle of inclination that the mass will move (between - 90 and 90 degrees), and  is the coefficient of friction between the moving object and any supporting structure or surface ( may vary between 0.1 and 0.4 for sliding metal-on metal parts, or about 0.005 for iron rolling on iron as in a ball bearing, etc.).
The Load Ratio is the relationship between the force required to move the load and the available force from the actuator. The load ratio is determined by:
In theory, the load ratio must be 100% or lower to be able to perform the task. In practical applications, the load ratio should be 85% or lower. Also note that if the actuator is able to deliver more force than the minimum needed to move the load, then the excess force delivered by the actuator is used to accelerate the load. In other words:
Speed is difficult to realistically calculate as it is not linear and dependant on the air pressure at the cylinders' ports which all have restrictors. But the time was known and as we know the distance, average speed could have been calculated. Also, if the application and other basic data were known, the required force, load ratio can also be calculated.
In order to make significant improvement in future, the following points should be considered to get more accurate result:
Students did not have any background knowledge of pneumatics as this was yet to be covered in course; hence time was taken to understand basic pneumatics.
More proper and modern instruments should have been used which has less fluctuation.
Students were also not used to the instruments like "Pneumate".
Not sufficient data was provided for as to how this exercises help supported in real life.
More forces acting on the actuator could have been found if some more information about the use of the exercise was mentioned and some more basic data was provided.
Time for the cylinders to operate was not noted in the laboratory, which could have helped in measuring average speed of the cylinder.
There could have been air loss in the circuit due to many factors, like improper connection, affecting the result.
Students make errors and therefore take time in fault finding pneumatic circuits, giving them less time for analysis of results.
More filtered air, with less moisture should be used.
The experiment in general was knowledgeable. Pneumatic exercises carried out can be used in real life in many areas. For example (6)'exercise 2 can be used to operate an automatic door which can open when switch S1 is pressed and close when switch S2 is pressed. Exercise 4 where the double acting cylinder extends only when both buttons are pressed can be used to operate machine to press parts into a die (example: sheet metal into car body panels). Exercise 5 can be used for stamping action, where when cylinder A extends causes the feeding of the stamper and when cylinder A is fully extended cylinder B extends causing the stamping action, and for ejection of the stamper switch S3 is used which causes the cylinder C to extend. Here, the stamping action can also be stopped by using S2 which causes the retraction of cylinder'. A and B. Applications of compressed air are limitless, from opticians gentle use of low pressure to measure fluid pressure in the human eye ball, the multiplicity of linear and rotary motions in robotic mechanisms, to high force required for concrete breaking pneumatic drills.
Although pneumatic actuators have many applications, there are advantages and disadvantages of using pneumatics instead of electrical actuators. Pneumatic actuators are relatively inexpensive as there is low installation cost. They are safer to use than electrical actuators. As electrical components get heated easily causing further damage. Pneumatic actuators can perform linear as well as rotary motion easily, hence are suitable for complex robotic designs while electric actuators are all basically rotary motion and complicated mechanisms are needed to convert rotation into other forms of motion. Pneumatic actuators also have high speed, while electric actuators have poor torque-speed characteristics at low speed. Pneumatic actuators are also suitable for lab work. Pneumatic circuits are also very easy for fault finding and can easily be operated unlike electric. On the contrary, electricity is easily routed to the actuators, as cables are simpler than pipes. Leakage of pipelines with high air pressure can be of a concern for health and safety. Electric actuators are fast and give accurate results, while pneumatic actuators have low accuracy and control. Pneumatic actuators cause noise pollution. It is difficult to control the speed of the pneumatic actuators compared to electric. Also electricity is available very easily compared to compressed air in some industries. For some applications electric actuators are preferred to pneumatic for instance, where there is large distances between actuated valves, in this case electric cabling is often less expensive than installing a compressed air system. Thus pneumatic actuators and electric actuators have their own advantages and if used together can help in making robotic mechanisms.
(6)'Normally pneumatic valves are actuated by solenoids triggered by electrical signals sent from a microprocessor controller (example programmable logic controller). The trainer "Pneumate" uses air instead due to ease of use and safety.' Another application where air can be more desired instead of electrical solenoids is where there is exploitation of flammable items. As solenoids and other electronic components can heat up or produce spark and can lead to fire.
While using pneumatic systems care must be taken of they type of air that is used. (9) 'Moisture in compressed air can adversely affect all elements of the air distribution system. It can cause rusting and scaling in pipelines, producing particles that are deposited in downstream components. This dirt alone or in combination with water, oil and other contaminants can cause valves to stick, instruments to clog and air-driven tools to malfunction. Aside from these obvious problems, moisture also reduces the power and efficiency of air motors and tools. Oil, dust, dirt and water alone or in combination, are the enemies that attack any compressed air system, plugging orifices of sensitive pneumatic instruments, wearing out seals, eroding system components, reducing the efficiency of air-operated tools, damaging finished products and otherwise contributing to product rejects, lost production hours and rising maintenance costs. Although the best defence against oil and dirt is effective filtration, this fact is often overlooked until problems arise. The degree of drying required will be determined by an analysis of the applications and environmental conditions. Various applications require different levels of air purity. Pneumatic Products work on a -40oC pressure dew point as standard on most of their products this minimizes any water formation in the system. However some applications require 'super-dry' air at a -70oC pressure dew point or better. Typically, these are applications were the purity of the air is critical such as in laboratory and pharmaceutical systems, electronics industries, cryogenic applications and chlorine padding. Pneumatic Products can engineer equipment for even the most demanding of compressed air duties.'