The field work was carried out in March 2005 at Friog Quarry, nearby to Fairbourne in Wales by JE Engineering Ltd. The investigation was carried out on the understanding that the site is desired to be converted into an area of public access that can be used for leisure activities such as walking, climbing and diving. The aim of the investigation was to determine whether the area is suitable for such activities in terms of the stability of the quarry faces.
The field work was carried out by JE Engineering Ltd on 15 The tests
done comprised a discontinuity survey to determine the stability of the rock faces.
There are several measures that would need to be taken if the site was to be used for its desired purpose. People must be made aware of the danger that the lake could potentially hold, this could be done by sign posting. As it would be impractical to install fences around the waters edge it may be a viable option to position life jackets there. Proper paths need to be installed around the area because the abundance of slate and loose rocks makes the negotiation of the existing walkways very hazardous.
This is particularly the case on the route down to the underground mine and it may be necessary to install steps with proper handrails. At present there is no overflow system in place on the lake and as a consequence water flows through the access tunnel, this would have to be modified. The access road, as already mentioned, is unsuitable for vehicles at present and work must be carried out to make it safer.
It is also imperative that the unstable slopes be made more stable, there are several measures that could be implemented to achieve this. Mesh could be placed over the rock face as to catch any falling debris. Retaining structures could be put in place to counter act the forces that are causing the instability, such structures are piles and anchors. A drainage system could be implemented to reduce the water that is allowed to build up in the cracks which decreases strength.
Fences should be erected around the edges of the quarry to stop anyone from falling over the edge.
The underground tunnels house many open mine shafts. These must be fenced off and a lighting system could be used to aid visibility underground.