The whole world is undergoing what is now an unavoidable change in climate and how and the extent to which this will affect people will range substantially from region to region. How the water supplies and water-related disease in semi-arid areas such as the grasslands of Africa, North East China, The Mediterranean and parts of Australia will be affected by the changes is investigated in this report. The water supply in these areas will be diminished by changes in precipitation, evaporation and soil moisture, river flows and groundwater re-charge which occur due to the rising temperature. Food production will be greatly affected by the unpredictable nature of the weather with changing seasons, high rainfall, floods, and droughts all featuring. These factors also greatly influence the spread of disease. Water-borne disease can be brought about either by contamination brought on by flooding or the use of poor quality, contaminated freshwater during a drought. Flooding and the temperate nature of semi-arid countries will facilitate mosquitoes which aids the spread of malaria, yellow fever and dengue. Through flooding malaria could be transmitted to areas to dryer areas where it did not figure before as conditions were not favourable to mosquitoes, which creates the risk of a malaria epidemic.
The Earth's climate is a major factor in the way that people across the world live their lives. Due to man's activities, particularly with respect to carbon pollution, a mean global temperature rise of 2 Particularly crucial to human survival is how the temperature increase will affect the water supply as fresh water will become scarce. Semi-arid areas such as the grasslands of Africa, North East China, The Mediterranean and parts of Australia are very susceptible due to their very nature and as these areas cover one-third of the Earth's surface, accommodating 900 million people, it is a very important issue. Global warming will affect the water supply by altering precipitation, evaporation and soil moisture, river flows and groundwater re-charge which will in turn affect diseases for which water is involved. Specifically how these will be affected is detailed below.
Precipitation is the main cause of variability in water balance over space and time and in semi-arid countries it is generally low already and highly seasonal. Different areas have varying rainy seasons and different levels of rainfall but the people are all well adapted to this and base their agricultural methods upon it. For the success of farming, factors such as the timing of the first rains (when affects when the crops are planted), distribution of the rains within the growing season and the effectiveness of the rains are all very important. Drought is another element that people have come to cope with, as in many instances it is predictable and they can therefore work around them, however with the changes in the climate, there will be little or no trend. On the other extreme, due to the erratic nature of the rainfall, there is risk of flooding. Risk of flood damage is particularly great in small settlements in semi-arid regions due to the rarity of extreme rainfall and in a warmer world the frequency of these storms would increase. During extreme rainfall, houses, roads, irrigation systems, and other constructions are destroyed and human settlements in oases are isolated because telecommunication and traffic connections are broken. As settlements have become adapted to the dry conditions, the total numbers of deaths and the total amount of damages caused by drought and other impacts of dry conditions often are smaller than those caused by heavy rainfall. Damages to the water supply caused by flooding can be disastrous; it can damage water treatment works, flood wells, septic tanks and waste disposal areas and sometimes overwhelm treatment systems, contaminating water supplies. In the case of drought, reduced water availability could force people to use polluted water sources in settlements at the same time that reduced flow rates reduce the rate of dilution of water contaminants. The quality of the water supply can also be affected with the growth of algae and other plants being much more prolific in higher temperatures, leaving behind nutrients when they decompose. These changes and unpredictability of the rains will impact on the welfare of the people with increased hunger, tiredness and sickness. Massive impacts will also be felt on natural resource based livelihoods, which are very common, generally in terms of crops dying, less feed for animals, less or poorer quality grass which all compound to have financial implications.
Climate change has the potential to affect all aspects of evaporation from the land's surface, which encompasses evaporation from open water, soil, groundwater and water stored on vegetation. Evaporation will be enhanced by an increase in the land's surface temperature, which combined with a saturated vapour pressure increase will lead to a decrease in soil moisture. In semi-arid regions, the soil moisture will be decreased to a greater extent than most other areas due to the relative humidity of the lower troposphere decreasing with global warming and the precipitation rate not increasing enough to replenish this. The amount of water stored in the soil is of fundamental importance to agriculture and influences the amount of evaporation, groundwater recharge and generation of run off. The increase in temperature will increase the demands for evaporation and the soil moisture will therefore be reduced for most of the year. Irrigated water will also be subject to greater evaporative demands, which puts further strain on the water supply. As the majority of semi-arid regions are surrounded by desert, it is thought that the reduction of soil moisture will result in a worsening of desertification. Hydroelectric power plants will be affected as levels in dams in these regions become lower which will impact upon electricity supplies.
Groundwater is the major source of water across the world, but particularly so in semi-arid regions. Changes in the frequency and the magnitude of the rainfall caused by global warming will affect how often recharge events can occur as it is often the case that such events occurred after flooding.
Some of the more lowland semi-arid areas will experience a salt contamination of groundwater resources caused by seawater intruding into freshwater aquifers brought about by the rising sea level owing to the melting of glaciers.
Diseases caused by malnutrition could become very common if poor yields become factors of the unpredictable nature of the weather. This will result in again less productivity agriculturally as people would not be able to work to their full capacity. Also, it would be more difficult to fight off the aforementioned diseases if an individual was suffering from malnutrition.
At the centre of the water supply problem is the threat to food production. By 2025, the amount of water needed for food production across the world will rise by 50%, due to population increase and higher standards of living but the amount of available water is declining. It will be difficult to adapt to the erratic rains and changing seasons, but it is imperative that efforts are made, through good water management, to obtain maximum usage from the precipitation that does occur.
Not only does the unpredictability of the weather affect food production but heavy rainfall, floods and drought are all factors in the spreading of disease as the majority are climate sensitive. Water-borne disease can be brought about either by contamination brought on by flooding or the use of poor quality, contaminated freshwater during a drought. Flooding and the temperate nature of semi-arid countries will facilitate mosquitoes which aids the spread of malaria, yellow fever and dengue. Through flooding malaria could be transmitted to areas to dryer areas where it did not figure before as conditions were not favourable to mosquitoes, which creates the risk of a malaria epidemic. Conditions that are inherent with global warming are favourable for rodent-borne diseases so this looks set to increase and malnutrition seems inevitable unless farming methods are adapted to meet with the changing climate.