This study contributes to engineering as a set of primary data has been created, in an area that has previously received a very limited amount of attention, out of proportion with its importance. The JRC is a component in the calculation of shear strength of rock joints and due to this is involved in particular with stability. Clearly, this could have implications most importantly for safety, if the shear strength of a rock joint was overestimated but also in construction. The visual estimation of the JRC is the most common method for its determination due to how practical and easy it is, although little is known about it. Studies have shown that it is subjective, (Hsiung et al 1993), (Beer et al, 2002) but very few have tried to determine and find the extent to which factors affect this subjectivity. This project attempts to investigate if spatial awareness is important in the approach, and if so to what extent. The results show that for reliable estimations a good spatial ability is necessary although reasonable estimations can be made for simple profiles by those with limited spatial abilities. This project could be of use to others as some useful conclusions have been drawn which could in turn be the basis of further research, possibly investigating deeper the relationship between spatial abilities and sound estimations. Also, it was shown that there may be scope for two dimensional profiles to be sufficient to base an estimate for a three dimensional rock joint on in some of the simpler instances. This also could form the basis of further research and possibly change the way field measurements are carried out.
Although the results that were obtained were not what one would expect to achieve as examples of normal distributions were quite sporadic, some relevant conclusions that have been backed up by other elements of the results and the results of other studies have been achieved. The fact that the standard deviation of the results is similar to that of the equivalent grouping in the study that it was based on indicates a certain reliability in the results.
Weaknesses in the questionnaire may have lead to some unexpected results for the lowest group of artistic ability. If the test was simplified, more instances of normal distribution may have occurred. As it was participants may have not understood what they were being asked to do which would have affected their results. The inclusion of responses where the participant has rushed their answers is unavoidable but if more results were gathered this would hopefully become less significant. There is the possibility, if unlikely, that the method that was used to graph the two dimensional profiles from the rock samples was not accurate enough to fully portray the roughness, but this is only vaguely shown in the results and can quite easily be disproven.
The aim of this study was to determine whether spatial skills affect an individual's estimation of the JRC and if so, to what extent. A task involving the visual comparison of four three dimensional rock samples and four two dimensional profiles to the standard set of profiles produced by Barton and Choubey (1977) was devised. This task was accompanied by a short questionnaire and taken by student participants around the University of  campus in January 2006. A participant's area of study, artistic ability and gender were all noted in the survey as previous studies have shown that these factors impinge upon an individual's spatial awareness.
It was found that for simple profiles or ones that correspond closely with the standard set that spatial abilities were not overly important as a reasonable estimate could be made without them. However, those who were deemed to have higher spatial abilities were able to deal with profiles with anisotropic surface roughness where those with lesser spatial skills provided a more varied response. Even on profiles where reasonable estimations were obtained by groups with lower spatial abilities, those with higher spatial skills gave responses that were much more definite and with smaller variation. It was concluded although reasonable estimates were obtained by the population as a whole for the simpler profiles, for an accurate and reliable estimate, a good spatial awareness carries a high degree of importance.