Part A - Material selection for fresh-water heat exchanger tubes
Within the heat exchanger fluid is pumped through a series of tubes which are immersed in a chamber that has another fluid flowing through it, during which heat passes from one fluid to the other. Certain material properties, for example, Maximum service temperature and Thermal conductivity will need to be considered in order to select suitable candidate materials for the heat exchanger tubes to be manufactured from. The Cambridge Engineering selector (CES) provides a short-list of suitable materials that meet the specification and in this instance six materials are selected. These can be further reduced by the addition of further selection criteria such as price and recycle fraction. After all the parameters are set, it is found that high conductivity copper provides the most appropriate solution to the problem. High conductivity copper has a high thermal conductivity, high recycle fraction and is also the cheapest material on the short-list.
Part B - Material Selection and processing for a computer case
A computer manufacturing firm requires a new portable computer based on a notebook size so that it has an A4 footprint. The design specification for the product is given and a suitable material and process of manufacture are required to be selected. The material must have appropriate properties such that it is able to be used for a computer case, it must be durable i.e. have high fracture toughness and high hardness and be light i.e. have low density. It is found that polymers provide the most appropriate choice of material and this is demonstrated by the fact that all nine of the materials selected are polymer composites. Processes of manufacture are also required to be selected and a short-list of these is generated. BMC moulding is found to be ideal as it is a composite forming technique so is suitable to be used with composite polymers, which are the most appropriate material group for this application.