A suitable structural section is required for a roof member that is to be pre-fabricated and used in an interior space that will be divided by glass curtain walls and the roof to be a pedestrian area. Due to the poor deflection tolerance of glass, the primary design consideration for the roof member is that it should have minimal deflection. Once the primary design specifications are limited, a performance index, M A Glulam Softwood rectangular section (720x90x32.53) provides the most appropriate section for the member to be designed to under the M Further characteristics can be taken into consideration to ensure that the most suitable section is chosen, these include; price, visual impact and availability. The performance index M This index avoids the problems associated with M M
In this instance the CES selector will be used to choose an optimum structural section from the considerable variety available within the database. The selection is chosen by producing a combination of the optimal selection parameters using the 'advanced' functions available within the programme.
A suitable structural section is required for a roof member that is to be pre-fabricated and used in an interior space that will be divided by glass curtain walls and the roof to be a pedestrian area. Due to the poor deflection tolerance of glass, the primary design consideration for the roof member is that it should have minimal deflection. The following specification for the member will need to be met:
Performance indices use several factors to determine which section would be most appropriate for the particular application. In this case the specification states that torsional rigidity and recycle fraction to be maximised and energy content to be minimised, the performance index M
The most appropriate section will have the maximum value of M
From the specification the maximum deflection of the roof member can be calculated:
The applied load in N/m is calculated from the equivalent factored live roof load of 100 Kg/m.
The maximum deflection of the beam, The resistance of the beam to lateral bending depends upon the flexural stiffness of the beam.
A suitable structural section for the beam to be constructed from is identified by setting the structural sections selection within the CES program to the following parameters:
The maximum capacity of the lifting gear that is available for use on site is 400kg, it is therefore necessary for the weight of the beam to be less than 400kg. A limit state is created within the CES programme to ensure that all sections selected will have a mass per unit length that is appropriate for the application:
To further limit the possible sections a graphical Ashby diagram of deflection against M The flexural stiffness is used as a variable and the deflection criteria ( The following list of sections passes the selection criteria:
The Ashby diagram in Appendix 1 shows that the Glulam Softwood rectangular section (720x90x32.53) has the highest M Using the performance index M The diagram in Appendix 2 shows the schematic of the Glulam Softwood rectangular section (720x90x32.53). One of the architects' requirements was that the beam should be partially exposed; the Glulam section would able to be partially exposed and add to the aesthetic appearance of the building. Glulam is softwood which might me more aesthetically pleasing within the architects' design rather than the Steel beams.
The sections manufactured from Hot Rolled Steel and the Pultruded GFRF Vinyl Ester are I beam sections, whereas the Glulam section has a rectangular section.
There could be other structural sections that are not included in the database that could be suitable for use as this structural roof member. There is continuing development of types of materials which inevitably means that new suitable structural sections could be developed from these materials. These sections would not be included in the current Cambridge Engineering Selector so would not be able to be considered.
All thirteen of the materials on the previous page meet the original specification for the possible structural sections that the pre-fabricated roof member could be designed to. There are though further characteristics that can be taken into consideration to ensure that the most suitable section is chosen:
The performance index, M M In this case the closer to 1 the performance index is better the structural section is compared to the specification of the section.
With
Where
The performance index M M The problems associated with M The weighting factors allow one of the properties, either recycle fraction, energy content or torsional stiffness to be made more dominant if the designer decides that this property of the section should take priority over another.
If a greater importance is placed on the recycle fraction i.e. The Glulam Softwood rectangular section (720x90x32.53) has a recycle fraction of 0.3 - 0.4 whereas the sections manufactured from Hot Rolled Steel have a recycle fraction of 0.9 - 0.95. This means that if the highest recycle fraction possible is the most important property then it maybe appropriate to select the hot-rolled steel over the Glulam section.
Even though Glulam has a lower recycle fraction than Hot-Rolled Steel, if the wood that the Glulam is manufactured from is obtained from a sustainable source, it makes the Glulam more environmentally friendly, whereas hot-rolled steel is manufactured from a non-renewable source.
The structural selection chosen if the performance index M The same 13 sections will always be the structural sections to be selected from as these are the only sections that meet the original selection criteria for defection and the applied load.
According to the first performance index, M Out of the 13 sections that pass the selection criteria of deflection and load per unit length the Glulam section has the highest M M
The