Renold Plc is a multi-national precision engineering group producing amongst others industrial chains and related power transmission systems. Like all limited companies Renold Plc is required to produce an annual financial report that provides a 'true and fair view' of the company's performance. In the case of Renold Plc the report produced complies with this belief, in the opinion of the Auditors, PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, the financial report provides a 'true and fair view' along with complying with all the relevant financial accounting standards such as those within the 1985 Companies Act. The implementation of the International Accounting Standards will mean there is an improvement in the stated profit before tax for the 2004/2005 annual financial report and this will affect the next financial report in several ways.
A variety of performance indictors can be used to evaluate the performance of Renold Plc over the past financial years along with an insight into the possible future performance. From the 2004/2005 annual financial report it is clearly seen that the company had a difficult year mainly due to the increase in steel prices of approximately 40% and the weakness of the United States Dollar. The future prospects for the company outlined in the narrative of the annual financial report 2005 and the interim report published 12
An important indictor of the performance of Renold Plc over the past financial year is to compare it to that of its peers. The peer group report according to FAME (Table 1 ), shows how Renold Plc has behaved compared to similar companies (according to FAME) which are not necessary Renold Plc direct competitors. From Table 1 it is possible to see that Renold Plc was placed forth within the peer report according to turnover. Graph 1 illustrates that the turnover for Renold Plc (shown by the red line) is within the upper quartile of the peer group, which could indicate that the company is performing well. It is although hard to compare companies within the peer group directly as the financial year ends are different for each company so the market forces, such as steel price, may not have affected the other companies when they produced their last financial report from which the data for the FAME peer report is taken.
The turnover for Renold Plc over the past 5 years as shown in graph 2 decreased since 2001, but increased slightly since 2003 to a turnover of 197million during the past financial year. Considering the upward trend for turnover over the past 2 years it suggests that Renold Plc could potential increase the turnover once again next financial year.
This initial peer review is simplistic as it singularly considers turnover as a comparative, to discover the performance of Renold Plc compared to its peers it would be necessary to consider other performance indications. Table 1 shows that Renold Plc had a profit before taxation of - This shows that out of this group Renold Plc made a large loss before taxation. As the peer report considers similar companies, not necessary competitors, the increases in steel prices that affected Renold Plc during the last financial year may not have affected them to such an extent therefore these companies may have made a profit before taxation.
Within the FAME peer report for Renold Plc there are a large number of various performance indictors that can be used to compare the companies within the report. The last peer report indictor that will be considered here will be the Return on Shareholders Funds. The definition from J. R. Dyson is that return on shareholders funds is a measure of pre-tax profit against what the shareholders have invested in the entity. From Graph 3 it can be seen that Renold Plc has had a difficult financial year during 2004/2005 with a negative return on shareholders funds.
Using the FAME peer report (Table 1) to evaluate the return on shareholders funds of Renold Plc compared to the other 18 companies (3 of the companies do not state a return on shareholders funds), Renold Plc is ranked 15th. Only four of the other companies within the report showed a negative return on shareholders funds, which suggests that the other entities within the peer group are finding the market situation adequate to utilise the capital within the entity to generate sufficient revenue. The return on shareholders funds is the most appropriate profitability ratio to consider when comparing a selection of different entities as it uses the net profit after interest but before taxation when calculating the ratio. J.R. Dyson warns that the taxation charge in the accounts of different entities can be subject to a variety of accounting adjustments and is therefore hard to compare one entity to another
Another profitability ratio like the return on shareholders funds that can be considered to evaluate the performance of Renold Plc is the net profit or profit margin ratio. This ratio shows the amount of profit for each pound of turnover that the entity generates. As with the return on shareholders funds the net profit ratio for Renold Plc (Graph 4) shows that the company had a non-profitable year during the last financial year.
The group profit and loss account within the annual financial report for 2005 of Renold Plc states that the company made a loss before tax of Within the narrative section of the annual financial report various reasons are explained for the performance of the company. Robert Davies, Chief Executive explains that commodity prices, in particular the price of steel, along with exchange rate movements have caused significant increases in input costs within the entity.
As the majority of operation of Renold Plc requires steel for manufacture of various components especially within the power transmission - gears and chains division, the increases in steel prices globally affected the company greatly. Graph 5 illustrates the large increase in global steel prices during the first half of the year. Roger Leverton, Chairman, explains that the increase in steel prices had a major effect in the second half of the year; there was an average increase in costs of approximately 40% within the Group.
The increase in steel prices has meant that the profit for the company over the past financial year has been negative. Although the company has increased sales over the last financial year it has found it hard to recover the costs, particularly from original equipment manufacturers. Looking ahead from the end of the last financial year, 31 The slight decrease in the price of steel along with other operating cost reductions that are being implemented by Renold Plc aim to provide a profit before taxation for the next financial year. It can not be relied on that steel prices will decrease any further or that the will not increase within the next financial year so various other methods of operating cost reduction will need to recover the increase in the cost of steel. According to the Annual Financial Report 2005 the company is outsourcing production to lower cost countries and implementing lean manufacturing techniques within its divisions.
Another large impact on Renold Plc over the last financial year was the weakness of the United States Dollar against the Pound. Graph 6 shows the weakness of the Dollar for the last three months of the last financial year up to January 2006.
Robert Davis, Chief Executive, explained that the strength of the Euro had "aggravated" problems that the chain division had faced as the majority of the production for the division was in Europe whereas the sales growth had derived from dollar-based economies. This is extremely beneficial for Renold Plc as the exchange rate will not affect them to such an extent as it did during the 2004/2005 financial year. Renold Plc also reduces the risk to currency exposure by employing foreign exchange contracts, so the fluctuation does no affect them so heavily of the contract time.
Another indicator of the performance of Renold Plc is the value of the share price which as you would have expected has fluctuated over the past 5 years (Graph 8).
The share price for Renold Plc decreased over the last financial year, April 1 This is un-beneficial to shareholders as they may not recoup all their initial investment if they sell their shares.
After the end of the last financial year of 2004/2005 the share price for Renold Plc decreased again to a low in mid May 2004 (Graph 9), but since then it has steadily increased until present (January 2006) which is a good sign for shareholders. The trend of increasing share price is extremely beneficial to shareholders as if they require to sell their shares they will get a higher price than they would have at the end of the previous financial year.
It is also important to consider the liquidation state of Renold Plc. The acid test ratio is a liquidity ratio; which according to J.R Dyson measures the extent to which assets can be quickly turned into cash. A ratio of 1:1 means that the company is using its assets effectively and is able to meet its short term debts. As shown in graph 10 the acid test ratio for Renold Plc has increased over the past 5 years and tended towards 1.0. This suggests that Renold Plc has enough cash available to cover its' current liabilities if necessary.
The acid test is a beneficial value for share holders to consider as it shows that Renold Plc has enough funds to pay off current liabilities which is beneficial to the company and indicates that the company will not be going into immediate liquidation. Over the next financial year, Renold Plc needs to ensure that the acid test ratio continues to have a value around 1.0, which demonstrates that it is using its resources effectively.
Shareholders will be particularly interested in the dividend yield of Renold Plc, as according to Jones the dividend yield ratio shows how much dividend an ordinary share earns as a proportion of their market price. If the entity believes that it is not performing well then it will not pay out dividends or they will be small. Roger Leverton, Chairman, states that there will be no final dividend payout for the 2004/2005 financial year, so the interim dividend of 1.5 pence per share will be the total dividend paid for the year.
Graph 11 shows that there has been a steady decrease in the dividend yield ratio for Renold over the past 5 years. The decreasing towards a low dividend yield could have occurred if the share price had risen in value considerably and the paid dividends remained constant. This is not the case for Renold Plc as from graph 9; the share price has in fact decreased over the past financial year.
To complete the analysis of investment ratios of Renold Plc the earnings per share will also be considered along with the investment ratio of dividend yield as discussed above. This ratio puts the profit of the company in context by relating it to the number of shares in use. The fluctuating behaviour of Renold Plc is un-beneficial for shareholders as they would prefer to see a growth in earnings per share over the past 5 years (graph 12).
To consider the overall performance of Renold Plc it is necessary to consider an efficiency ratio. Trade creditor collection period has been chosen as it represents the average time taken for an entity to pay for its credit purchases. Graph 13 shows the upward trend of trade creditor collection period over the past 5 years for Renold Plc.
As there is an upward trend over the past 5 years in the trade creditor collection period it suggests that Renold Plc does not have enough cash to pay its creditors. An upward trend indicates that the entity might be having some financial difficulties as it is taking longer to pay its creditors. The sharp increase in 2005 could be alarming as it could indicate that there is a problem within the entity, if this trend continues over the next few years, it could be a sign that Renold is in financial trouble.