An important consideration in the design of road vehicles in the amount of drag that the vehicle experiences. Reduction in drag is advantageous to achieve good fuel efficiency and speed; streamlined bodies are therefore favourable over buff bodies as they produced less drag. The Buckingham Pi method can be used to derive the key parameters associated with drag and although estimations of the drag (using known coefficients of drag) for a designed race car can be calculated, prototype scaled modelling or computational fluid dynamics software can also provide useful information on the aerodynamics of the racing car.
The Buckingham Pi method can be used to derive the key parameters associated with drag. The force The dimensions for each variable are shown in Table 1.
The reduction In this case; j = 3 as
Combining
can be found:
Equating the exponents for length, mass and time the pi groups shown below are found where the dimensionless group
The functional relationship for drag force
When the boundary layer thickens rapidly the adverse pressure gradient and boundary shear cause a decrease in the momentum of the boundary layer and over a sufficient distance can cause the boundary layer to come to rest, this phenomenon is known as separation [1]. Downstream the adverse pressure gradient causes backflow near the wall and this produces a wake. When a body moves through a fluid it will experience a drag force, which is defined by two components; frictional drag and pressure drag. Frictional drag occurs due to the friction between the fluid and the surface of the body and is responsible for the formation of boundary layers. Pressure drag is caused by the difference in the high pressure region in front of the stagnation point and the low pressure in the separation region or wake.
When the separation in flow over a body can be minimised, the boundary layer remains thin and the reduction in pressure in the wake is low therefore the pressure drag in minimised. In such circumstances the drag is dominated by frictional drag and the body is streamlined. The streamlined smooth rounded shapes on the body of a racing car produces low drag, which is beneficial as it will allow for better fuel efficiency and speed. When the drag is dominated by pressure drag the body is known as a bluff body. For a given frontal area and velocity, a streamlined body will always have a lower resistance than a buff body [2]. Buff bodies have higher drag due to the widespread separation due to any sharp corners present on the body.
A coach can be considered as a buff body with a rectangular side section. The aerodynamic drag The coefficient of drag can be estimated based on the frontal area and an estimated value of C
There is a complex relationship between drag and turbulence. In a laminar flow separation is caused more readily due to the small amount of momentum brought into the laminar layer. In a turbulent boundary layer there is a greater momentum transfer so the separation point is further upstream of the stagnation point than in laminar flow. The wake formed by a laminar boundary flow is greater than that of a turbulent boundary flow, thus the pressure drag is greater. The drag on a body subjected to a turbulent flow is therefore less than the same body subjected to a laminar flow.
There are limited elements that the engineer has control over within car design. The engineer has control over the aerodynamic shape of the car although the overall size of the car is generally predetermined by the brief, for example, the number of passengers the car is capable of carrying. The complex economic relationship between aesthetics and aerodynamic drag performance means that an aesthetically pleasing car maybe designed to ensure high sales figures, but this could be at a detrimental effect on the aerodynamic drag performance of the car.
With aerodynamics and passenger accommodation being the most important factors in designing this race car the following design was achieved where the passenger is completely enclosed within the car.
The drag of the racing car in figure 1 can be estimated by considering the car to be made from two ellipsoid shapes with external wheels. Each ellipsoid shape is estimated to have a coefficient of drag C The total drag of the lower ellipsoid is 131.5N, and an estimation of the upper ellipsoid, taking into account that only 0.4 of the ellipsoid is actually present within the design, has a drag of 29.6N. It is also necessary to consider the drag from the two front wheels, with a C
Calculations of the drag acting on the racing car designed are only estimates. Scaled models can be used in prototype road vehicle design and could be used to investigate the drag acting on the race car designed. Scale models allow visual observations of the flow over the vehicle while water and wind tunnels examine the streamlines and forces that are induced as fluid flows over the model. Scale models must have geometric, kinematic and dynamic similarity between model and prototype for accurate quantitative data to be obtained. In practice this is extremely difficult to attain unless at 1:1 scale ratio is used, which is impractical in most modelling situations. It is necessary to manufacture the model to be tested which can make scaled model testing very expensive. Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software could also be used to analysis the aerodynamics of a race car (figure 2) without the need to produce a scaled model; this process can provide more information than from a wind tunnel. CFD does though require extensive computer processing power and sophisticated software which can both be expensive.