The link between trade and poverty has been the subject of wide research because of the ambition to reduce poverty in developing countries. The issue is topical because of its connection to the loan conditions given by international financial organisations. A requirement for open trade is common because of the benefits of increased trade in terms of income. However, the question remains whether the gains are visible in reduced poverty and inequality.
The research on macro level about the benefits of increased trade for the poor has provided ambiguous results. The results range from little/no effect to adverse effects like in Lundberg and Squire (2003), who find that trade actually increases inequality. The effect on poverty also depends on the growth effect of trade which is considered mostly positive empirically. Ravallion also states that the model specification remains unclear with several control variables and assumptions about the error term. The analysis across countries is difficult because of survey differences and other disturbing characteristics even when country dummies are included.
The aim of this study is to partly repeat the analysis in Ravallion. The paper does a time-series regression analysis to explain the reduced poverty in China in terms of opening the trade. Trade is not found to be a significant factor and there must be underlying factors like agricultural policies that explain the reduced poverty.
I will repeat the time series analysis for India to see if the results are the same. India has experienced a drastic increase in trade in the last few years of the sample 1980-2005. Trade has had an increasing trend since 1986 and simultaneously, poverty has gone down. It needs to be determined if these two are related. Data is collected for India, then the stationarity of the variables is analysed and an appropriate estimation technique is decided on.
The variables included and their descriptions are shown in the table below. They are all in logs.
Poverty gap is used as the dependent variable and the rest as explanatory variables. It can be questioned if percentage variables should be logged but this specification is taken from Ravallion. First, I will look at the graphs, correlograms and unit root tests for each series to determine stationarity and the order of integration. These are presented below for poverty gap and the rest are in the Appendix 1 for reference, observations summarised in table 2 below.
Poverty gap has gone down but with a decade of fluctuation mid-sample. A correlogram for the levels is non-stationary, the autocorrelation function goes to zero very slowly with a lot of persistence and the partial correlation function is at first close to one, then zero suggesting an I(1) variable (integrated to order 1). For the first difference the correlogram looks stationary and indeed, when testing for a unit root we cannot reject for the levels whereas reject for the first difference, meaning the series is I(1). Akaike Information Criterion is used because it is better for small samples.
The inclusion of a possible I(2) variable complicates the analysis. Its presence, being the highest order of integration will dominate and with no other I(2) variables this will prevent co-integration to make the combination stationary to allow estimation. However, because not rejecting the unit root for LCPI was borderline and depended on the significance level, I will proceed with the analysis assuming that it is I(1) since the estimation of higher orders of co-integration is not in the scope of this study. Ravallion does not find co-integrating relationships between poverty and trade, stating that there is no stable long run connection between the two, and then uses a shortcut, to estimate the equation by simply differencing each series until it is stationary. Therefore I will comment on the estimation and results of a similar differenced model first and then proceed with investigating the existence of co-integrating relationships in the long run for India's case. The population model from Ravallion is as follows (all variables in logs) and the estimation results for the sample coefficients are shown below, standard errors in parenthesis and bold print meaning significantly different from 0 at 5% level.
(1)
R-squared 0.489214
Adjusted R-squared 0.250847
From now, the "t" under script is dropped unless there are lags.
Looking at the results, the model does not seem to explain the data well in terms of significance. Even at 10% significance level, only one more coefficient becomes significant (the lag of d(d(lcpi)) and the goodness of fit measures are low, especially when adjusted for the number of explanatory variables. There is a positive relationship between inflation and poverty gap which was not expected and only the lagged effect is negative. The coefficients are a measure of elasticities between the dependent and the explanatory variable because both are in logs. For example 2.54 is the inflation elasticity of poverty gap, but it must be noted that these are differenced variables.
What the analysis confirms is that using a similar method to Ravallion we found similar results. Trade does not enter to significantly explain movements in poverty. Only LCPI had a statistically significant effect. I will test this for misspecification using a Ramsey RESET including the squares and cubes of the residual from the original model.
We cannot reject the null of the model being correctly specified.
There is nothing further to comment on this model. The variable of interest does not help to explain poverty gap. We cannot investigate the relationships because we are dealing with differenced variables instead of levels. To verify these relationships in the long run and to find further information, I will proceed assuming that all variables are I(1) and test for co-integrating relationships among the variables that could make the combination stationary.
The aim of the paper was to see if trade is significant or not in explaining reductions in poverty. This was not the case with China and now it has been confirmed for India as well. The recent years especially have seen a great increase in trade share but this has not been met by decreased poverty. It remains to be seen if the effect takes longer to realise, as our observation period is quite short it cannot be fully verified. This also causes small sample problems when OLS is only consistent under very specific assumptions. The quantitative results are therefore not very predictive but they correspond to theory with respect to coefficient signs implying that the signals from the data are interpreted correctly.
What could be included in this study is a more thorough analysis of the model and the co-integrating relationships between the variables which remains unclear. Inflation is generally an I(2) variable but also trade here demonstrates similar effects. As the estimation of a mixed model containing I(2) and I(1) variables is out of the scope of this study, but could be done in an extended piece of research. Also relevant would be to refine the model to actually capture the variables that affect poverty in India, as shown the same variables that worked with China were not significant here and include some dummies to correct for breaks. This requires investigation of the economic, political and social conditions during the time period to understand the variables in question. This has been attempted in several studies but as in the developing world in general, specific sources of poverty are difficult to pin down.
The policy implications of this study are not straightforward because as Ravallion states, trade volume is not a policy variable. It is also not certain whether it is endogenous to the model. What we can say is that by showing that trade volume does not explain changes in poverty it means that gains from trade are filtered to the higher income levels. This implies a case for increased redistribution, government might need to be more bullish in taxing the profits gained by companies from increased trade to alleviate the increased inequality observed in other papers as well. At the same time, if the price of food is kept artificially low through government intervention it can harm the domestic producers. This study has confirmed once again that there is no clear cut Pareto efficient way out of poverty.