The beginning and the phenomenon of conglomerate mergers had occurred in United States in late 1960'. A company made of few unrelated businesses running independently - but with one supervisory board- seems to be great idea to spread the financial risk. It is an additional question what convince companies to merge in general. Above reducing risk exposure, some of them want to synergy or to increase market share, cross selling or diversify their risk. However, as the phrase of late 1960s has shown, in too large conglomerates financial problems and serious difficulties with their management occur quite often.
How does it work in European Community? To evaluate the EC treatment of the anti- competitive effect of conglomerate mergers, it is reasonable to define the merger under EC law and to go trough the main regulation on this subject, to understand more complex issues. The second step will be to characterize the conglomerate merger treatment under EC law- how does it work in general, in what circumstances such a concentration can be profitable or abusive, and moreover what possible effects it may cause. The main discussion in this essay will regard the anti- competitive effect of conglomerate mergers in reasoning and explanations of the European authorities: The European Commission, Court of First Instance and especially European Court of Justice while considering cases, to show how the treatment of conglomerate merger was evolving; also in academic debate.
The European Council Merger Regulation defines what constitute a merger and (art. 3 of ECMR) describe the substantive criteria of a concentration (art. 2). Conglomerate merger may be characterized as a fusion between two entities having no current or potential competitive relationship. It is possible to distinguish conglomerate mergers between producers of complimentary, neighbouring and unrelated products. Because of the fact, that the Commission is considering conglomerate mergers quite rarely, usually its reasoning refer to so called "pure" conglomerate, involving entirely independent products. Even though conglomerate mergers do not produce anti- competitive effect in a form such as an increase of market share (like horizontal merger effect does) or the possibility to foreclose rivals on up stream or down stream market (vertical merger effect) they can possibly give rise to competitive harm.
From the economic perspective conglomerate mergers are considered as resulting bundling or tying usually in the context of art. 82 EC Treaty. From this point of view there are two conglomerate theories of harm, those arising as a result of strategic behaviour such as leveraging and the latter -resulted by non- strategic behaviour. Whether it is possible to distinguish them in theory, in practice it is much more difficult, if not impossible to detect, because it is based only on future predictions of potential competitive harm.
CFI while considering the Tetra Laval case showed that conglomerate mergers can also create so called "structural" effect ,when arises directly from the established economic structure or latter- "behavioural" which occurs only if a new entity would engage in particular commercial practices i.e. price discrimination or predatory pricing. The current or potential advantage from conglomerate merger may be use to eliminate competitors from the market. As it will be shown it is very complex and difficult task for EC authorities to collect sufficient evidences proving the anti- competitive intention of mergering entities. In other words, it is not enough to foresee likelihood of leveraging but "cogent" evidence is needed. Therefore it is reasonable to familiarize with the criticism of the Commission analyzes while prohibiting conglomerate mergers in Tetra Laval/ Sidel or GE/ Honeywell cases. What anti- competitive effect can the conglomerate potentially cause? The Commission is concerned with mainly two- the portfolio effect, discussed in complex way in the case Guinness/ Grand Metropolitan and leveraging- using power from one market to neighbouring one- trough price discrimination, product bundling and predatory pricing- discussed broadly in Tetra Laval/Sidel case.
The main approach of the anti- competitive effect of conglomerate merger may be divided into two periods- after the prohibition in GE/Honeywell but before the Tetra Laval/Sidel case- and after it.
The pre- Tetra Laval/Sidel approach was presuming that, if it is possible to find pre- merger dominance and existence of conglomerate links, which as a consequence gives the ability to "pursue" strategic behaviour. Thus, it was enough to state, that a company is involved in anti competitive behaviour. Owning to this, as discussed in F. Dethmers, N. Dodoo and A. Morfey publication, above concerns are only reasonable if commercial either technical link exists, otherwise there would be no place for a conglomerate theory of harm. This approach was broadly criticised, because have established the threshold intervention on very low level, moreover have left a limited number of protective remedies for entities proving inability to act anti- competitively i.e. to technically tie two products together and as a consequence, can not sell them "only" as a bundle.
In fact, as ECJ stated in Tetra Laval/Sidel case "merger control must be carried out with great care, since it does not entail the examination of past events - for which often many items of evidence are available which make it possible to understand the causes - or of current events, but rather a prediction of events which are more or less likely to occur in future".
So called "Portfolio effect" may be created if a company possesses a wide range of "similar" products, not exactly on this same market and because of this fact more willingly, with greater financial flexibility can set promotions and discounts. Consequently tying or threat of a refusal to supply is more likely to occur. However, it would usually depend on different factors, i.e. how many brand leaders the holder of a portfolio possesses etc.
Leveraging in the context of conglomerate mergers control occurs when a company with a strong pre- existing position at one market, acquires an entity performing on related or neighbouring market. Additionally this practice may be described as "by which a company extends its market power existing in one market to another market where it did not have this power previously".Thus, it is crucial to proof, that there is some chain of cause in examined entity's conduct. However it is highly complex and complicated to show this dependence (because) the chains of cause and effect are dimly discernible, uncertain, and difficult to establish."
The desired standard of proof of leveraging was broadly debated in Tetra Laval/Sidel case. The Commission's conduct was based on the problem if particular entity will be likely to create dominant position, when the CFI reasoning in para 153 of its judgment required the proof of dominance in "all likelihood... in relatively near future." While proceeding in the Court of First Instance, the Commission was arguing that inconsistent with "double symmetrical obligation"- standard of proof amounts to presumption of legality. While debating about the required standard of proof the ECJ stated that, because this type of merger has a prospective effect the quality of the evidence is very important, thus the Commission needs to show that " if particular decision would not have been taken, the economic development envisaged by it would be plausible".
The Court was also debating about the standards of an economic assessment. The Court of First Instance in Tetra Laval/ Sidel case claimed that conglomerate merger examination calls for "particularly close" and "precise" analyzes supported by convincing evidence, while The Commission stated that it is a shift from Kali Salz requirement of "cogent and consistent evidence". Finally, the ECJ set decision in general supporting the CFI judgment stating that CFI possesses the right to require "close examination" of relevant circumstances because of the fact, that the quality of evidence is particularly important in leveraging cases.
The CFI judgment was ruled in favor of Tetra Laval/Sidel, showing that the Commission needs to be still aware of the power of courts, that they can at any time examine its conduct and decision. The highest Court explanations show, how difficult it is to foresee all consequences of decision, for example that the demand of "close examination" of pre merger situation by the Commission will cause the "paralyze" of this authority and much work overload. Additionally, how complex case the Tetra Laval was and that no without any purpose is so called a "landmark case".
Unlikely to the opinion of Attorney General who stated that it is unpersuasive reasoning, The Commission was criticizing the CFI settlement, claiming incompatibility with structural nature of Merger Regulation, difficulties with implementation and contradiction with one of the main legal principle- the presumption of innocence. As a result, appealed to ECJ from the CFI decision,  hoping, that ECJ rejects the reasoning presented in the CFI decision.
ECJ was considering two grounds of appeal, pointed by the Commission. Therefore, decided that however the Commission has a margin of discretion due to economic matters it does not mean that the CFI and other courts in course of judicial review are not able to examine the Commission's interpretation. Concluding, it does not mean that the Courts were infringing the art. 230 of EC Treaty as the Commission were claiming. Furthermore, that debated issue is so complex and extremely difficult also because of its prospective effects, that such a review is necessary. Conversely to the first ground of appeal which was found irrelevant, the second one was accepted partially. The debated issue was related to requirement of convincing, cogent and sufficient evidence established by CFI while assessing a proposed merger. ECJ stated that however the likelihood of leveraging must be examined comprehensively, it "would run counter to the main purpose of ECMR- prevention to require the Commission " to assess in each proposed merger a number of factors. As a consequence of the CFI statement the required high probability of the facts occurrence would force The Commission to unnecessarily too detailed examination, and shift from relying on relevant fact to more speculative reasoning.
The CFI comparison to the Gencor case was hardly criticized by the ECJ, mainly because it was completely different from "Tetra case". The main reason was that in Gencor the concentration would cause the creation of a dominant duopoly and consequently impede the structure of the market and because of this the possibility of an abuse would be foreseeable. In my opinion this reasoning is highly reasonable. Unlikely to the Tetra Laval/ Sidel case were the carton market construction may be "slightly changed", but as a matter of fact, did not cause the effective competition on this market, but on the market of PET equipment.
It has to be highlighted, that the ECJ judgment does not exclude prohibition of conglomerate mergers under the ECMR but put a rigid legal and practical constraints on the Commission in case of considering its prospective effect, basing on the theory of competitive harm. Owning to this, there is a need to show chain of cause and effect of such a conduct, what is more as the ECJ stated, supported by high quality of evidence, what is extremely important while considering potential, future effect. Secondly the deep analyzes of the effectiveness of behavioural commitments have to be performed.
The Commission did not take into account the proposals made by the Tetra Laval company, deciding that they are behavioral in nature, rejecting them without testing the market. This step taken by The Commission was criticized in course of judicial review- by CFI, Attorney General and ECJ. All stated, that "commitments would have substantially reduced scope for leveraging", what is more, the Commission did not even try to check whether they would have been effective or not, deciding that they are "pure promises", in general "mere" stating to refrain from acting in contravention of Community law and " as such, they are not suitable to restore conditions of effective competition on a permanent basis ..., since they do not address the permanent change in the market structure created by the notified operation that causes these concerns' and, that "such behavioural promises are in contrast with the Commission's stated policy on remedies" , moreover conversely to the main principle of ECMR. According to this, it would be very difficult to control it effectively.
The alternative remedy for leveraging concerns is the ex- post merger control under the art. 82 EC Treaty. However it raises the question, whether the post application would be sufficient examination. The explanation of the post- merger control is much clear- waiting allows the competition authorities to observe if the leveraging practices will occur and consequently what result they will cause. The availability of the ex- post remedies was accepted by the CFI in its judgment in Tetra Laval/Sidel case.
Leveraging practice usually tends to lower rivals' profits by affecting its business but not in a way of directly increasing their costs. In the case of Guinness Grand Metropolitan the Commission was considering if a new merged entity by widening its "flexibility and capacity" will not try to engage in "tying, to structure its prices, promotions and discounts". Similar concerns were discussed in a case GE/Honeywell were the Commission was relying on "the combined financial ability of the merged entity to cross- subsidize discounts across the products composing the packaged deal" Moreover, as it was predicted by the Commission in Tetra Laval/ Sidel case the simple tying as a part of leveraging can even cause the decrease of prices. Thus, it may be difficult to observe how it convince a sufficient number of customers to purchase the tied good and as a result to achieve expected foreclosure, unless the merged entity reduces the price of the tying and possibly tied product.
It is very interesting issue, why practices such as leveraging occur more often on the EC than i.e. US market? American competition authorities are less worried about the effect of conglomerate mergers. Secondly it is observed that companies operating on common market are afraid of legal constraints imposed by art. 82 EC Treaty. Thus it is a questionable issue for the European Competition Authorities if the present approach is reasonable and creates the desired effect on the market? Maybe the Commission needs to provide a "time- frame" within which the effect of conglomerate merger should be considered, like it have indicated it in horizontal cases were "countervailing factors" arising more than two years after entities have merged, may be recognize as too speculative? Therefore, the Commission "predictive" powers would be limited by the available evidence, thus all "harming" speculations possibly will not be taken into account? It is hoped that the situation will be clarified in the nearest future and that the Commission's approach will follow the US one. There is a need for setting up a threshold against which mergering companies would be able to examine their conduct in advance in order to be aware of problematic issues, raising competition concerns in conglomerate cases.