Crystal Violet (((4-bis(p-(dimethylamino)phenyl)methylene)-2,5-cyclohexadien-1-ylidene) exists in two resonance forms of which can be bleached by the addition of hydroxyl ions that reacts via a dramatic colour change. This dramatic colour change allows the kinetics of the reaction to be monitored. The kinetics of this reaction is investigated by probing the effects of varying concentration, temperature and ionic strength; allowing the rate, order and activation energy of the reaction to be calculated.
The two resonance forms of crystal violet are shown below (fig 1):
The addition of hydroxyl ions via a source as for example NaOH, leads to attack of the hydroxyl ion at the positive carbon in the tertiary carbocation resonance form, of crystal violet. This forms the carbinol compound (fig 2) and occurs via a dramatic colour change from intense purple to colourless.
Changing the concentration of NaOH and crystal violet will enable the rate and order of the reaction to be calculated. Varying the temperature and ionic strength of the solution by addition of KNO
A UV spectrophotometer was used throughout all the experiments to monitor the colour change of the reaction. Throughout this experiment the concentration of crystal violet must not exceed 5 x 10 The concentration of NaOH throughout the experiment has to remain in excess to ensure the reaction goes to completion and to enable the concentration of the NaOH to remain relatively unchanged. Running a UV spectrum of crystal violet showed the maximum absorption of the molecule to be at 590nm, therefore throughout the experiment this wavelength was used.
The linearity of the plot of ln Absorbance against time plots establishes that the reaction is a pseudo first order reaction. This was further confirmed as changing the concentration of crystal violet did not change the observed rate constant. The pseudo first order rate constant k' was obtained from of ln Absorbance versus time using a least squares analysis. All the sets of data were extrapolated back to account for time between mixing the solution in the cuvette and placing the cuvette into the UV spectrophotometer. This was done by using the FORECAST function.
The results for the order of the reaction with respect to the concentration of OH- was found to be first odrer which was confirmed from the literature value obtained. The rate constant calculated was inaccurate compared to a literature value, this may have come about from some experimental errors. One source of these errors may have been from the varying concentration and varying ionic strength experiments. As the solutions used in these two experiments were not placed in a water bath to obtain a steady temperature throughout the experiment and in doing so may have caused errors in the result. This error may come out more in the calculation of the rate constant as this requires a high degree of accuracy to obtain an accurate result.
The activation energy of the reaction of 57.69 kJ mol Also the effect of ionic strength on the rate of the reaction showed that with increasing the ionic strength the rate of reaction decreased for both of the inert salts used. This again was confirmed from a literature value.
[5] L. Garci a-Rio,, J. R. Leis, J. C. Mejuto, Langmuir