Since the discovery of Penicillin G Both types of -lactam are natural products that are produced by bacteria and fungi.
Both penicillin and cephalosporin are biosynthesised from the amino acids cysteine and valine (Figure 1). Mass manufacture is achieved through fermentation. Full synthesis of penicillin in the laboratory was achieved in 1957 by Sheehan, In 1959 Batchelor isolated the biosynthetic intermediate 6-aminopenicillanic acid (6-APA)
Initially, cephalosporin analogues were not as easy to produce. The biosynthetic precursor 7-aminocephalosprorinic acid (7-ACA) Eventually a chemical hydrolysis of the amide was developed by synthesising the imino chloride, which can then be hydrolysed to the amine (Scheme 1).
The The main targets of -lactams are the transpeptidase enzymes that catalyse the last step of bacterial cell wall biosynthesis. The two types of sugar unit provide the backbone structure of the peptidoglycan: these are N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM) and N-acetylglucosamine (NAG). Pentapeptide chains are attached to the NAM sugars, which usually end in the sequence D-Ala-D-Ala. These pentapeptide chains are then cross linked by displacement of the terminal D-Ala residue (Figure 2). This final step is catalysed by transpeptidase enzymes. The structure of the peptide crosslink varies between species of bacteria. For example, The pentaglycine chain then links to the D-Ala of another pentapeptide, creating a pentaglycine bridge.
The mechanism of transpeptidation centres on the catalytic serine residue in the transpeptidase's active site. This attacks the carbonyl of the amide link to the terminal D-Ala group, which cleaves the amide bond. The tetrahedral covalently bound intermediate is then attacked by the peptide side chain of another pentapeptide, forming a new peptide bond and a cross-link between the two chains (Scheme 2).
There are two theories on how -lactams can inhibit the transpeptidase active site. The rest of the molecule blocks the active site from other possible substrates so the ester link is protected from transpeptidation or hydrolysis. Therefore, the serine residue remains acylated and cannot participate in any more catalytic activity, leaving the enzyme irreversibly inhibited (Scheme 3).
Inhibition due to direct acylation of serine, as proposed by Tipper and Strominger, occurs because -lactams imitate the structure of the D-Ala-D-Ala terminal sequence of the peptidoglycan pentapeptide structures. However, there are a few anomalies with this theory. One is that 6-methylpenicillin Therefore, the analogy to the peptide substrate is not the only interaction that causes -lactams to be such good inhibitors.
The alternative theory is that -lactams bind to a site near to the active site, blocking access to the active site. This is called the umbrella effect.
Exploring the Tipper-Strominger theory further, it can be assumed that a -lactam with a side chain that mimicked the peptidoglycan substrate would have a higher activity than ordinary -lactams. This theory has been proven by Josephine, Kumar and Pratt.
Both a penicillin The penicillin The cephalosporin
It is thought that the higher activity of both This has been shown to be the case through x-ray crystallography studies, which examined the electron densities of the -lactam molecules in the active site (Figure 4). The definition of From these electron densities the non-covalent interactions were deduced (Figure 5).
Not only is the penicillin This is ideal as -lactamases are one of bacteria's main natural defences against -lactams, and are responsible for resistance in some species. It has been hypothesised that -lactams were first produced by bacteria as "chemical warfare agents" targeting each other's cell walls. However, bacterial resistance then evolved with the production of -lactamase enzymes by some species. These enzymes are similar in structure to DD-peptidase enzymes, However, unlike DD-peptidases enzymes, when the serine become acylated the ester link is quickly hydrolysed and the deactivated ring-opened -lactam is released into the extracellular fluid. These enzymes are so efficient that they can hydrolyse up to 1000 -lactam molecules per second.
However, although -lactamase enzymes are homologous to DD-peptidases they do not have any significant activity against peptidoglycan. It is thought that the active site of -lactamases has evolved from the DD-peptidases so that it excludes peptides and extended sections of peptidoglycan. The active site of DD-peptidases becomes blocked by the -lactam molecule so once it has acylated the enzyme the ester link is protected from nucleophilic attack. However, a differently shaped active site this would mean that the -lactam molecule may not block it efficiently, leaving room for water to access the ester link.
The inactivity of -lactamase enzymes towards peptides and peptidoglycan can be exploited in -lactam synthesis, as by Josephine
The rate of inhibition of This gives a k This was supported by fluorometric analysis of the direct reaction of It is claimed in the paper that the fluorometric analysis is in good agreement with the competition experiments; There is also no fluorometric analysis for the cephalosporin For completeness these should have been added. There is also a discrepancy in the k Early on in the paper it gives a value of 1.5 x 10 This appears to be a typing error that should have been addressed before publishing, but it throws uncertainty over which is the actual value. These are only minor errors and the final results seem reliable, as attested by it being cited in other. However, if these there should ideally be a more thorough investigation into the inhibition rate constants using other methods, such as isothermal titration calorimetry, and also with other enzymes instead of just R61 DD-peptidase.
Although Josephine have proven that mimetic -lactam side chains do increase the activity of the molecule, there have been other reports where mimetic peptides have shown low levels of inhibition against DD-peptidases, with the enzymes even showing a preference to other non-specific could be anomalous, except for the x-ray crystallographic information to support it. There are several possibilities why the other investigations did not achieve similar results. One explanation could be that each species of bacteria has a unique structure of peptidoglycan. Therefore it requires a unique DD-peptidase to perform the transpeptidation cross links. In trying to make the -lactams more specific, and therefore more active, the mimetic peptide side chains could be specific to some types of DD-peptidase active site, while others recognise a different peptide sequence. Another reason could be that DD-peptidase enzymes are usually bound to the cell membrane Therefore, the membrane binding section of their protein sequences is removed to solubilise the enzymes.16 Removal of this section could cause alterations to the enzymes' tertiary structure, affecting the shape of the active site. This could mean that the enzymes are still inhibited by -lactams but lose the peptide recognition site, rendering mimetic peptide side chains useless. The enzymes This would explain their activity with the mimetic peptide -lactams as their active sites would have remained intact.
Overall, it has been shown that This could lead to a new generation of However, if the transpeptidase enzymes have unique peptide recognition sites then it may be a case of tailoring a Developing in vivo experiments would go a long way to solve this problem and also give an idea about whether these DD-peptidase inhibitors could be viable medicinal compounds.