This article describes the stereoselective synthesis of 5-hydroxymethyl azabicyclic ring via novel methodology epoxide-initiated cationic cyclisation of azides. The authors report a study on epoxide-initiated cationic cyclisation of azides and the synthesis of stereo- and enantioselective total synthesis of natural and unnatural indolizidine alkaloids 167B and 209D.
Azabicyclic rings are present in many biologically active natural compounds. Within this indolizidines alkaloids are the one of the most important classes known for their numerous pharmaceutical applications, and because of this they are desirable. The stereoselective synthesis of the 5-hydromethyl azabicyclic ring is important as it is a potential precursor to the total synthesis of two indolizidine alkaloids - 167B and 209D (Figure 1).
One of the main steps to forming 5-hydroxymethyl azabicyclic compound is centred around work by Aube and Peason on intramolecular Schmidt reaction of alkyl azides. By treating the 5-membered epoxyazide These type of reactions were derived from alkenes and alcohols and have proved to be facile in both intra- and intermolecular examples. For the formation of
The formation of key intermediate The known ketoester This method was used as initial trials using Wittig olefination were poor yielding. The alcohol The corresponding azidoolefin
The key cyclisation step was investigated to compare a variety of lewis acid used and it was found that EtAlCl Possible reasons for the increased yield with this particular lewis acid however, are given. The stereochemistry of compound Further experiments were carried out to confirm the relative stereochemistry of the cyclised product
An investigation into the general use of this method is done by varying ring size in compound When n=2, 3 the yield in the formation of These larger rings were obtained in an inseparable mixture of cis- and trans-isomers, however no reasoning was given for this. In the cyclisation step to form The relative stereochemistry of
The key step in the stereoselective synthesis of indolizidines 167B and 209D is comparable to that in the synthesis of 5-hydroxymethyl azabicyclic compound The relative stereochemistry is similar and therefore To determine the relative stereochemistry of these compounds, the spectroscopic data was compared to that of the same compounds previously synthesised but via a different route.
The main step in the enantioselective synthesis of (+)- and (-)-Indolizidines 167B and 209D is the Sharpless asymmetric dihydroxylation, ADH (scheme 5). The synthesis of optically active epoxyazide The formation of Selective mesylation of the primary hydroxyl group is then followed by the formation of epoxyazide The corresponding enantiomers synthesised are determined via measuring the optical rotation and quoted as a [ The major trans-(-) isomer was then cyclised using the standard conditions as previously described, followed by functional group manipulation to afford the S enantiomers (measure by optical rotation) of 167B and 209D in 68%, 78%ee and 74%, 75%ee respectively. The spectral data was compared to that of the natural (-)-(5R, 9R)-Indolizidines and found that the only difference was in rotation therefore the synthesis produces the unnatural (+)-(5S,9S)-Indolizidine 167B and 209D. The journal does not quote a reference as to where this spectral data comes from for the natural enantiomers at this point. The ee of compound
The enantioselctive synthesis of the natural (-)-(5R, 9R)-Indolizidines 167B and 209D was readily available via using the chiral ligand (DHQ) Taking the trans product Again the corresponding enantiomers were assigned by measuring the optical rotation and quoted as [
In summary this manuscript describes a reasonable route to the synthesis of stereo- and enantioselective synthesis of indolizidines 167B and 209D; however, it is lacking in some important information. In the introduction to this article the authors describe previous methods to forming azabicyclic ring systems containing a nitrogen atom via cation-induced inter- and intramolecular electrophilic cyclisation reaction. However there is no comparison between the method described and a previous synthesis and therefore the value of this work can not be ascertained. When describing the total synthesis of indolizidines 167B and 209D there are references made to various other methods of stereo- and enantioselective syntheses however again the authors make no comparison between their own work and the work previously carried out. There is no clear scientific reason as to why this new methodology was carried out and although the target compounds are synthesised in reasonable yields and ee, it is unclear as to whether this is an improvement on previous synthetic routes; this is a failing of the paper.