Recent reforms have sparked much debate concerning the role of the disclosure rules in the English adversarial legal system. The scope of discussions has been generally concerned with the overall fairness of the criminal justice system, and is influenced by reference to both Article 6 of the ECHR, and broader notions of natural justice. "Many believe that disclosure represents one, if not the, most potent source of wrongful convictions", and as such it is essential that legislation offers protection to the accused while ensuring that justice is done.
The CPIA was introduced against a backdrop of miscarriages of justice that were attributable to failures by the prosecution to disclose evidence. As well as purporting to address the issues raised by cases such as Ward
, by requiring the prosecution to disclose unused material which might undermine the prosecution case, the act also placed an obligation on the accused to outline his defence. As a reward for doing so, the defence were to be supplied with secondary disclosure material that may assist their defence. While this initially appeared to appease the growing consensus in favour of some form of mandatory defence disclosure, it became evident that the disclosure scheme was not functioning as intended. The CJA was used as a vehicle to "remove perceived obstructions to the attainment of cheap and swift convictions", and in doing so placed greater obligations on the defence, while streamlining the prosecution's role with regard to unused material to one of continuous review.
As Quirk suggests, "both the CPIA and CJA are underpinned by the 'crime control' values and rhetoric about 'rebalancing' the system that have characterised recent criminal justice policy making". My concern is thus that in re-evaluating the principles of criminal justice, the government has lost sight of the need for a fair trial in order to maintain public faith in the legal system. With the assistance of empirical evidence, this essay will firstly consider whether the current regime makes adequate demands on the prosecution to furnish the defence with information. It will then proceed to assess the reciprocal obligations placed on the defence, and the extent to which these compromise the privilege against self incrimination and the duty of the state to prove a prima facie case.
My research started by considering the opportunities for empirical research. I relied on a previously established working relationship with a WPC at a police station near my home town, as well as getting in touch with a personal contact who sits as a Magistrate at Norwich Magistrates' Court. For background on issues before the court, I spent a day in the Magistrates' Court, observing a variety of cases which involved procedural matters. What soon became apparent was the use of the court for timetabling matters, and the delays that were inherent in the system as a result of the poor availability of evidence, and general difficulties with the preparation for a hearing. On this basis I decided to focus my essay on disclosure.
After re-reading lecture notes, I used the online library resources to search for reported cases which echoed my concerns with the disclosure regime. From that point, it was then possible to find case notes as well as journal articles on the recent legislative reforms. Generally my research relied on a research trail using sources cited in other articles.
A search of  Library provided several books on evidence in the criminal process, as well as one specifically on disclosure. I was fortunate to be able to use the library at the University of East Anglia to source relevant books that were not available at .
Having read through the available material and formulated my essay question, I emailed several brief questions to my two contacts. They responded with their general impressions of the system, and were key in shaping my approach to the essay. I also telephoned firms of solicitors who had represented clients at court. I was provided with contact email addresses for three solicitors, to which I sent further questions. To date, I have not received a reply.
The internet was a key source during the writing of my essay, especially in order to find government reports and consultation papers. LexisNexis Butterworths was particularly useful for legislation. Some wider searches however, did not provide the information sought. A search for the Code of Practice for Interviewing Defence Witnesses was particularly frustrating - while consultation closed 10 th December 2004, there is no evidence of a document. Re-reading of books showed that sources from 2006 still refer to the document as 'being drafted'.