In order for David to gain a remedy for the loss of the photos, there are several arguments he can advance. This essay will examine these arguments and comment on the validity of each argument and the likely.
If David is able to prove that the limitation clause was not part of the contract Photoprint will be liable for his loss and he will be able to seek a remedy. To do this David will need to prove that neither the limitation clause displayed on the sign, nor his irregular signing of the receipt, nor the ticket he received, result in the incorporation of the clause in the contract.
 However, David may successfully argue that the clause is not permitted to limit liability for negligence.
Exclusion clauses, unless clearly stated, as held in However, this strict rule was relaxed in
 In the case of any doubt the
Nevertheless, it is uncertain whether the courts would find Photoprint clause to be sufficiently precise to limit liability for negligence. The phrase in This would suggest that Photoprint would be unable to limit their liability for negligence.
Unfortunately for David, the relaxation of the rules with regard to limitation clauses, as well as the introduction of UCTA, has resulted in a less rigorous attitude displayed by the courts towards the substance of limitation clauses. It is likely that the courts will determine that the clause does satisfy the construction rules.
Invalidating the clause under the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982:
This is a contract of service and, therefore, the Supply of Goods and Services Act (SGSA) 1982 is applicable. David has a contract for supply of service with Photoprint and "there is an implied term that the supplier will carry out the service with reasonable care and skill" Where the incorrect solution was used there is arguably a breach of this implied term.
Once the implied term has been established under SGSA David can seek to apply UCTA, to have the limitation clause effectively invalidated. UCTA clearly applies, as Photoprint is a business In this case it is immaterial which section David seeks to rely on, as both impose the reasonableness test
The only remedy available to David is damages. In In
It is difficult to advise David of the amount he would receive in damages. In this case David has not suffered any direct distress or disappointment other than failing to fulfil his promise to Sue. This will be a factor limiting the amount awarded. However, an aggravating factor is the loss of two complete films, double the loss in Warren. It is certain that he will be awarded more than the cost of two replacement films and a fair estimate based on the case law and the facts of David's case would be