The Proceeds of Crime Act (POCA) was introduced in 2002 to reduce the profitability of crime and thereby minimise the " The POCA was intended to give effect to the European Union Directive
These earlier reforms were introduced by Parliament in realisation that " In many cases prior to 1986, the courts were powerless to strip criminals of their unlawfully obtained assets. This was illustrated in R v Cuthbertson
Separating criminals from their wealth not only serves as a highly effective reprimand, it also fulfils several important functions for society. Prior to the POCA a criminal could " Confiscated monies are paid directly to the Home Office and are reinvested into crime reduction programmes, thereby further reducing the adverse impact of crime on society. Similarly, the POCA provides for innocent victims to reclaim direct financial losses.
In cases of serious organised crime unlawfully earned wealth can become the working capital for future criminal endeavours. One of the functions of the POCA is to respond to this threat and to act as a crime prevention measure as well as a punitive measure. A further fundamental objective is " Terrorist organisations depend on their ability to successfully raise and conceal funds.
This essay will examine the effects of the POCA on solicitors, accountants and bankers (hereafter 'practitioners'), with a particular focus on the implications for those dealing with trustees. It will also discuss whether the disruption and difficulties presented to practitioners in the financial sector by the POCA outweigh the benefits of the Act.
As well as consolidating previous legislation the POCA created a new agency, the Assets Recovery Agency (ARA). The ARA has the responsibility of " To facilitate the ARA's task the POCA introduced the confiscation Restraint orders
The aim of these provisions is to detect and prevent money laundering. Anti-money laundering provisions are contained in part 7 of the POCA, which has the greatest impact on practitioners. Furthermore, trusts "
Money laundering is the process of converting monies derived from criminal activities into funds which appear to have a legitimate source.
Money laundering occurs in three stages. Criminal profits are first placed into a legitimate business or into the financial system. The funds are then layered and transformed by buying and selling currency, property or other assets domestically and abroad to disguise the audit trail. This is the stage where trusts are most likely to be used, and " Then the seemingly legitimate money is reintegrated and returned to the criminal. Effective prevention of money laundering is, therefore, imperative to the "
As the majority of money laundering is " Prior to the introduction of the POCA it was felt that businesses and practitioners were not providing enough support to the authorities in the fight against 'dirty money'.
The POCA creates offences based on the practitioner's knowledge or These suspicions must then be reported to the Serious Organised Crime Agency (SOCA)
In order to comply with money laundering legislation and avoid committing a POCA offence, practitioners dealing with trusts are expected to be alert to the signs of money laundering. Practitioners must consider whether the true purpose of a trust with which they are dealing is to conceal criminal property. In order to do this, the Law Society expects solicitors to use their knowledge of the nature, purpose and original source of the funding for the trust
To guarantee compliance with the POCA, several practical steps are recommended for solicitors dealing with trustees. Solicitors should investigate the trustee's position by referring to the establishing document of the trust. In such cases, solicitors are advised to make fuller enquiries of the trustees to obtain details, such as full name and the business or home address of the settlor.
A practitioner may be guilty of a The POCA defines criminal property as being "
The POCA broadened the scope of money laundering to reflect the fact that laundering is not " POCA specifies that This means that certain offences which might not normally be regarded as criminal, such as participation in a cartel, could give rise to money laundering. The POCA is neither concerned with the nature of the underlying offence nor the size of the proceeds
There are numerous statutory and common law defences available to those dealing with trustees. These defences provide important reassurance to practitioners who face a prison sentence of up to 14 years and an unlimited fine The defences also serve as an important limitation to the broad scope of the POCA.
Practitioners may escape liability for the principal offences by making a disclosure prior to the potentially criminal act being carried out, in accordance with section 338 Once a disclosure has been made the practitioner must await consent from the SOCA before continuing with the transaction. Further statutory defences are available as well as common law defences, such as legal professional privilege. The defences and the procedure for disclosure give rise to several practical and legal implications for practitioners.
Having reported a suspicion, in order to avoid liability, practitioners must await consent from the SOCA before continuing with the transaction. This consent may be either express or deemed. The nature of the consent, as well as the time limits involved, is of particular importance to practitioners. Deemed consent arises either where the SOCA does not give notice that consent is refused within seven working days or where consent is refused by the SOCA in the initial seven day period but a further 31 days have elapsed without the SOCA obtaining a restraint order.
A practitioner awaiting consent has to deal with the anxious situation " Commercial pressures to rapidly complete transactions are incompatible with the uncertainty caused by waiting for deemed consent time periods to elapse.
Institutions which often become suspicious and delay dealings whilst consent is furtively sought are likely to lose business to competitors who apply the POCA provisions less rigorously. However, lax application of the POCA is a risky tactic, and lack of compliance or delays in reporting can result in sizeable repercussions for businesses. In 2003, Abbey National was dealt a Businesses and practitioners have to attain the difficult equilibrium of satisfying their POCA obligations, whilst maintaining client satisfaction.
Express consent is a more attractive alternative and in such cases the average response time is less than three days. The time involved in the process consent is still seen as excessive for practitioners forced into an unnerving position and under considerable commercial demands.
Practitioners are continuously seeking practical ways to reduce consent times. This can often be achieved by careful focus on the facts provided to the SOCA; " This places an additional burden on practitioners, as time and resources are spent researching the details of trustees and sifting through complex transactions to provide useful and decipherable information for the authorities.
The all encompassing nature Fears have been expressed that where professional advisers are obliged to report trivial cases of money laundering this places " In practical terms, the "
In the long-term, there may a decline in apprehension of the legislation and fewer SARs will be submitted. This would result in reduced disclosure by overworked professionals who refuse to file SARs which appear to be of little value to most businesses. This would in turn undermine the effectiveness of the legislation, which relies on practitioners reporting their suspicions.
In 2005 nearly 95,000 SARs were submitted; almost double the number of reports from 2003 Therefore, it appears more likely that reporting will reflect the current trend and continue to increase. Increased reporting will require greater resources for the SOCA to deal with requests. Unless government funding increases to match the costs, there are likely to be further delays pending consent. It is extremely probable that practitioners and financial institutions will incur increased expenditure, as yet more time and resources will have to be devoted to compliance.
The POCA has created some confusion with regard to legal professional privilege (LPP) and disclosure. In Bowman v Fels It was also held that it could not have been the intention of Parliament that steps taken by lawyers to determine or secure legal rights and remedies for their client would involve them committing an offence of "
This ruling is helpful to lawyers as its " Following the Bowman ruling the number of suspicious activity reports filed by solicitors dropped from 19,000 in 2004 to 9,600 in 2005
However, the Bowman ruling that the common law LPP is no longer overridden by the disclosure requirement, is arguably The Court had already decided the case on the basis that litigation did not constitute an 'arrangement' under section 328. This creates a legal complexity for lawyers, as they cannot be certain of the exact law relating to LPP.
Some clarification is offered by the Law Society guidelines on Bowman v Fels However, even by following this guidance to the letter, lawyers can still not be confident that they will not be committing a POCA offence. Following guidelines is only a mitigating factor, "
If a practitioner assumes that the Law Society guidelines and the If LPP applies then " It is reasonable to deduce that no client guilty of an offence would be willing to waive his LPP, which would render a request for such consent worthless. Furthermore, if a practitioner were to seek his client's consent to waive his LPP, the act of inquiring could itself alert the client to the practitioner's suspicion and might result in a tipping off offence
The tipping off offence is committed where following a report to the SOCA someone " It is therefore, difficult for practitioners to refuse consent for a transaction and then have to deal with an irate customer, to whom no explanation can be offered. A practical solution for practitioners is to apply for an order for the execution of a trust to be carried out under the direction of the court. Furthermore, this will provide evidence of honesty should a third party subsequently bring an action for 'dishonest assistance' in breach of trust.
The introduction of the POCA also created disquiet for financial institutions regarding the competing obligations of performance of contractual mandate and the duty to disclose suspicious activity to the authorities. This conflict of interest was resolved in K Ltd v. National Westminster Bank plc The Court of Appeal held that, "
The extreme consequences of the legislation were clearly highlighted by the Court of Appeal in terms of prohibition to the "free flow of trade". However, in practical terms, the ruling was pivotal for professionals and institutions, providing reassurance that compliance with the POCA would not result in exposure to litigation from clients for breach of contract.
Practitioners must also be wary of committing secondary offences such as failure to disclose. Such an offence would be committed if "
The offence of failure to disclose has exacerbated the " In many cases reporting tends to result from unusual rather than suspicious behaviour and has been driven out of fear of remaining compliant rather than concern that money laundering is actually occurring.
There is no statutory definition of suspicion in the POCA and it " In R v Da Silva R v Da Silva defined suspicion as applicable to the Criminal Justice Act 1988. However, when passing judgment, the Court of Appeal also mentioned suspicion under the POCA, and it could therefore be assumed that the same definition should apply.
The Court of Appeal went on to say, " Furthermore, it was held that using " The scope of suspicion is of vital practical importance to both financial professionals and their clients.
It is essential that the level of caution protecting against money laundering is not so restrictive as to inhibit day to day financial transactions.
A practitioner will also be able to justify his inaction by showing that he " However, in practice, this defence will be of little comfort to practitioners, who will have to hope they have done enough to convince the jury that, suspicion was not of a settled nature
The line between a 'fleeting thought' and a 'possibility' is so fine " To avoid potentially committing a POCA offence practitioners would be best advised to simply disclose anything they remotely suspect, including 'fleeting thoughts' of suspicion.
Where practitioners protect themselves by disclosing Clients are forced to rely on practitioners exercising their good judgment when applying the legislation and only making disclosures where they have a genuine suspicion.
The problem of practitioners overzealously reporting unusual behaviour is compounded by the objective test imposed under section 330. The requirement is that a practitioner must make a disclosure if he has " Therefore, even where a practitioner can prove that he did not suspect money laundering, if it can be shown that he should reasonably have suspected then he will be guilty of an offence.
Practitioners must take care to scrutinise every transaction. A " Therefore, practitioners must remain vigilant, and continued transactions with a client who had not aroused suspicion in the past will not protect practitioners from a POCA offence. This could damage relations between contracting parties, as practitioners can never afford to automatically trust a client's intentions. Furthermore, the practitioner has to devote extra time and resources to analyse the actions of even the most trustworthy clients.
There also appears to be a difference between the combined (objective and subjective) test Practitioners must be sure that where there is reasonable suspicion sufficient to lead the practitioner to submit a report to the relevant authorities they can nevertheless assist in the transaction and avoid the risk of constructive trusteeship.
Where a practitioner is unsure whether or not there is a breach of trust he is only " The practitioner would only be a constructive trustee and liable for the breach of trust if " The mere suspicion required when reporting under POCA falls significantly short of dishonesty
" This is a result of the POCA's definition of criminal conduct, as an act which " This has criminalised conduct which might not be unlawful in the country in which it occurred.
A commonly cited problem caused by section 340 is that of the Spanish matador, who is a revered celebrity in his country, however, his proceeds would be regarded as criminal in England and Wales.
The government sought to rectify this difficulty for legitimate businesses by introducing changes to the POCA through the Serious Organised Crime and Police Act 2005 (SOCPA). A person now no longer commits an offence "
Certainty that the act was not unlawful in the country and time in which it occurred would, therefore, constitute a defence. This in itself creates difficulties, in a practical context, it may be necessary to take legal advice from local lawyers to be This will necessarily incur increased costs to businesses handling overseas transactions.
Furthermore, this defence is subject to the further proviso that it " Included in this list are any crimes which would be punishable in the UK by imprisonment with a maximum term of more than 12 months.
UK practitioners therefore have to comply with two legal regimes. This increases costs to businesses and amplifies the amount of compliance checks to be undertaken. Practitioners might, justifiably, decide to avoid the expenditure of time and resources through making a disclosure to the SOCA regardless of the availability of this defence. It has already been argued that, "
There are other aspects in which the POCA appears ill conceived and poorly implemented. Further amendments had to be made to the POCA to " The SOCPA introduced an addendum
Prior to this a The practitioner had no statutory protection if he reported the offence during the act. This might have lead a panicked practitioner to remain silent and continue the money laundering rather than risking bringing attention to himself for 'committing a crime'.
Litigation in this area exemplifies the uncertainties prior to the amendments to section 338. In Tayeb v HSBC Bank plc HSBC responded by filing a report and transferring the money back to its origin. The transfer was completely innocent and Tayeb issued a claim against HSBC in debt. The court ruled in favour of Tayeb and held that "
The amendments to section 338 also pose practical questions regarding the actions of practitioners following 'mid-act' disclosure. Whilst there is a requirement under sections 327(2)(a), 328(2)(a) and 329(2)(a) for consent before continuing with the act, there is no requirement for consent when the disclosure is made during the act under section 338(2A). It is, therefore, in doubt whether consent is implicit or the practitioner must desist immediately to avoid committing an offence under the POCA. The decision in Tayeb Colman J states that the flexibility of allowing mid-act or post-act reports "
A further original problem with the POCA was that disclosure to NCIS However, practitioners were still obliged to report in order to avoid committing an offence. To prevent useless disclosures being made the POCA has been amended so a practitioner will only commit an offence if he is able to "
This amendment once again appears to be of little utility. Section 330(3A)(b) now invites practitioners to consider what law enforcement agencies might be able to glean from seemingly innocent information. Without detailed knowledge of the resources and techniques of the authorities, the amended legislation cannot be envisaged to have a significant impact on disclosure. Practitioners will continue to disclose all information no matter how innocuous, for want of falling foul of section 330(3A)(b).
Compliance with the POCA and the Money Laundering Regulations 2003 A 2003 KPMG study found that the regulated sector spent an estimated This was reflected by the small number of disclosures made by small and medium banks.
Having analysed the impact of anti money laundering compliance on institutions, it seems clear that the costs accrued are in excess of the benefits. Financial institutions do not view themselves as "
It can be argued that the POCA was badly conceived and poorly drafted. Only through effective limitations by the courts and subsequent amendments by the government has the act become more clear and manageable. However, practitioners still have many difficulties attempting to comply with the POCA and this is illustrated by the huge number of disclosures, only a fraction of which are investigated by the authorities.
 In many areas the POCA remains untested and the overzealousness of reporting reflects the lack of certainty in the scope of the anti money laundering provisions.
There have been considerable practical implications for practitioners dealing with trustees. It is now common for practitioners to make extensive investigations into trustees with whom they are dealing to ensure that there is no criminal property being laundered. Practitioners must comply with a harsh disclosure regime, which requires them to constantly assess their suspicions or the suspicions they ought to have. As a result, transactions have to be delayed, data compiled for the authorities and practitioners are forced to deal with irate clients to whom they can explain nothing for fear of tipping them off.
However, for all its shortcomings, the POCA is " Whilst the cost of compliance and the practical effects on practitioners in the financial markets is significant, "