Good corporate practices are vital for the confidence of investors and employees and indispensable to "help ensure the longevity of the organisation" The centrality of corporations and corporate power in the modern world also profoundly influences the economy and society as a whole.
Definitions of corporate governance are not always consistent.
There is continued discussion as to how good corporate governance should be achieved and enforced. It is generally agreed that no single mechanism can provide the solution to the issues presented by a separation in ownership and control.
Shareholders are able to appoint all of the members of the board of directors. However, the system still relies on non-executives as a controlling element. Non-executives do not have these management capabilities and their responsibilities lie with general policy and strategy as well as the monitoring of executive directors. Monitoring is not intended to be a mere passive observation of the executives. Non-executives are entitled, and encouraged, to "give executive directors a rigorous drilling"
The requirement to monitor executive management is reinforced by the Combined Code The Combined Code specifies that "at least half the board, excluding the chairman, should comprise of non-executive directors"
There is no legislation in the area of corporate governance. The objectives of three influential committees The Combined Code is, therefore, not legally binding and there are no sanctions resulting from non-compliance.
The Financial Service Authority Listing Rules In the case of non-compliance, an explanation must be provided. However, the only sanction for non-compliance with the Combined Code itself is the reaction of the market.
Institutional investors are shareholders, mainly comprising of pension funds and insurance companies. The combined share ownership of pension funds and insurance companies in the UK has more than doubled from 16% in 1963 to 33% in 2004 Institutional investors have a strong interest in closely observing the corporate governance of companies, especially in light of the "internationalisation of cross-boarder portfolios"
This paper will examine the current form of corporate governance in the United Kingdom as well as the efficacy of the current regulatory regime.
In spite of the importance of corporate governance, it has only relatively recently achieved prominence in the commercial sector.
Following such high profile and catastrophic failings from company directors and internal systems, much of the recent development of corporate governance has been driven by the need to restore investor confidence in capital markets.
As well as monitoring the management, non-executives are required to be satisfied "on the integrity of financial information and that financial controls and systems of risk management are robust and defensible" Appropriate levels of remuneration for executive directors are determined by their non-executive counterparts and non-executives also have an important role in appointing and removing executive directors.
Many directors, both executive and non-executive, see the role of non-executives as strategic rather than investigatory. The existence of non-executive members on the board of directors provides no guarantee of effective monitoring and control of the management.
The system of appointment requires that "a majority of the nomination committee should be independent non-executive directors" However, there is no concrete guarantee that familiar associates of executive directors, who are unable exercise the impartiality required to properly uphold shareholders' interests, will not be appointed. As a result, these non-executives "will not monitor any more diligently than they feel they should be monitored in running their own companies and will rarely risk loosing their jobs by questioning management's decisions"
The degree of independence to be expected of a non-executive is a key issue. Reservations have been expressed over the partiality of non-executive directors with existing personal ties.
Non-executives who are sympathetic to the views of management and are unlikely to challenge decisions are more prone to being selected and retained.
Non-executives may find they lack the necessary information in order to correctly monitor the actions of managers. Often managers control the quality, timing and volume of information released to non-executives.
Resignation is a course of action often favoured by non-executives who oppose managerial decisions. Resignation seems to be a particularly inadequate method of exerting pressure on the management and is not a desirable means of ensuring good corporate governance.
Monitoring is expected to run throughout a non-executive's term of office and not just in times of crisis. It is felt,
In theory impartial members of the board who examine the workings of the company from an insider's perspective are good enforcers of corporate governance. In reality non-executives are not always independent, have significant pressures on their time, are unlikely to be overly critical of the approach taken by management and lack the necessary influence to resist poor managerial decisions.
Due to the size of institutional investors they have the ability to influence the actions of companies and these investors are seen as crucial to realizing good corporate governance. Institutional investors will normally consult reports published by the industry as well as undertake their own research to be sure that companies are complying with good governance recommendations.
Institutional shareholders can show their dissatisfaction with management through an 'exit' or 'voice' framework Normally institutional investors will seek to resolve any contentious issues with management through discussions. Abstention from voting on, or voting against, a particular issue is a further extension of the exercise of an institutional investor's 'voice'. The ISC recommends the use of dialogue, but does not preclude the sale of shares where this would be the most effective response to concerns.
Asking institutional investors to monitor and control management on behalf of all shareholders in the firm can present fundamental problems. There are questions as to how willing or capable institutions are to actively govern corporations. This could be as a result of the fact that institutional shareholders are offered protection by the liquidity of the markets and can largely afford to be "uninterested in all but the most substantial abuses"
Institutional shareholders invest money on behalf of their own clients. Where these investors own equity with superior voting rights they may seek to avoid paying out cash flows on a pro-rata basis and instead pay themselves special dividends.
Problems of expropriation of smaller shareholders could be compounded where the institution is a different type of investor. For example, if the institutional investor is an equity holder it could use its position to compel the firm to take on risk, "since [the institutional investor] shares in the upside while the other investors, who might be creditors, bear all the costs of failure" It can be argued that, "while this governance structure may control managers, it leaves potential minority investors unprotected and hence unwilling to invest"
Theory, as well as evidence, suggests that hostile takeovers are an effective means of ensuring a company is well managed. Following acquisition, the new owner will typically remove the poorly functioning management. Takeovers have, therefore, been argued to be a crucial corporate governance mechanism.
Many commentators believe that "the current institutional restraints on managerial behaviour ... are simply inadequate to prevent corporate assets from being used in ways dictated by the managerial interest" One suggested reason for this is the lack of sanctions behind the provisions of the Combined Code. At present, the only result of non-compliance will be the response of institutional shareholders and the market itself. Only in the most serious cases of managerial ineptitude or self-interest is there likely to be a reaction.
Arguably any meaningful market test is only likely to apply to small firms. The cost to a 'free' market capitalist society of a large corporation going into administration is too great for the government to endure. Therefore, the only realistic restraint on the management in large firms is the threat of hostile takeover.
Takeovers, institutional investors and non-executive directors all appear to be mechanisms which will detect and react to cases of gross mismanagement but which do not look closely enough or are indifferent to less serious managerial excesses.
The scandals of the end of the twentieth century and the beginning of the twenty-first, provoked immediate demands for legal change. However, using the law to regulate the financial industry "is not always the panacea hoped for" Compromises built into the law, inadequate solutions or inadequate resources for policing may be factors preventing the law from exercising effective control.
For this reason, principles, rather than specific rules, have been adopted as the most desirable means of regulating the ever adapting corporate sector.
Corporate governance regulation is still in its infancy; however, there is no doubt that it "is an economic necessity, a political requirement and a moral imperative" The foundations of a reliable system have been laid and continued development of the roles of non-executives and institutional investors are the most desirable direction in which to proceed.
Internal regulation of the board through non-executives is a valuable objective. It is vital that non-executives exercise sufficient scrutiny and have sufficient independence to exert control over management. However, arguably, the most important restraint is that of institutional investors. There is an increased realisation and acceptance from institutional investors that the enforcement of good corporate practice is their role.
Companies are increasingly acceptant of the Combined Code and the Code of Best Practice. This acceptance, coupled with the willingness of institutional investors to control management, means that there is no need for prescriptive and inflexible laws. As institutional investors continue to increasingly adapt to their role, monitoring and pressure on the board will increase, and better corporate governance practices will result.
It is vital to avoid the repetition of past damaging financial scandals. Should the current system fail to sufficiently regulate excessive managements, legal regulation should be considered. Meanwhile, the system should be subjected to continued review and institutional shareholders and the market itself should be encouraged to participate as much as possible.