The right to silence is a prominent feature of adversarial justice systems and is often erroneously viewed as a single entitlement. The right to silence is in reality a collection of privileges; with the most important being the right of a suspect to remain silent under accusation or interrogation and the right of a suspect not to have to testify at his own trial.
The right to silence derives from the privilege against self-incrimination. The judiciary have recognised the privilege as being "deep rooted in English law" and as one of the rationales behind many other judicial safeguards, such as the rejection of improperly obtained confessions. However, as Lord Mustill indicated, "statutory interference with the right is almost as old as the right itself". Furthermore, the judiciary itself has not always been a staunch advocate of this right and, in the past, courts have expressed regret that restrictive rules have prevented them from commenting on the failure of defendants to answer questions during interrogation.
There is a clear tension between trying to strike a balance between protecting the defendant's established privilege against self-incrimination and the need for the courts to obtain the necessary information in order to convict criminals. Prior to 1994 the judiciary became increasingly reluctant to allow the defendant to thwart the prosecution case through silence, especially in civil matters. The legislature reacted to this and other stimuli, especially the prevalent use of silence by suspected terrorists in Northern Ireland, by passing the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act (CJPOA) 1994.
The CJPOA disposed of the absolute right to silence and allowed, for the first time, courts to draw adverse inferences from a defendant's silence. The most important limitation of the right to silence, and the focus of this essay, is section 34 CJPOA which allows an inference to be drawn if the defendant, "[upon] being questioned, ... failed to mention any fact [later] relied on in his defence". The rationale behind section 34 is that it is expected that an innocent individual would wish to provide his exculpatory explanation at the first opportunity. If he fails to do this the jury should be allowed to draw adverse inferences from his later fabrication, which is little more than an attempt to ambush the prosecution and ensure an unmerited acquittal.
However, even prior to the CJPOA the "common law right [to remain silent had] been diluted in certain areas". For example, in cases where a person is accused of a crime by another speaking to him on even terms, then he ought to reply to that accusation, and "if he does not it is some evidence to show that he admits the [accusation] to be true". The judge was also able to comment, although not adversely, on a defendant's failure to make a statement. This allowed the jury to be reminded that, where a defence was raised for the first time in court, the police had not had the opportunity to test its veracity. The judge could further draw the attention of the jury to the fact that the defendant's silence in court has "deprived [them] of the opportunity of hearing his story tested in cross-examination". It is evident, that in reality, prior to the CJPOA, the right to silence did not exist in absolute form and both common law and statutes had weakened and limited its application.
Many commentators were heavily opposed to the introduction of adverse inferences, especially as the right to silence had already been significantly undermined. O'Reilly argued that, "the use of adverse inferences will erode or eliminate the right to silence and, in doing so, shift the burden of proof to the accused, in some cases reduce the prosecution's burden of proof, and will weaken or remove the presumption of innocence". This essay shall examine whether, following the introduction of the CJPOA, and the resulting jurisprudence, the legislation has successfully achieved its goal and whether a defendant is in a substantially more disadvantaged position.
In February, I wrote to Snaresbrook Crown Court to ask if I could be a Marshal with a Crown Court judge for three days at the end of March. I was told that this would be possible and I was assigned to Judge , on the 26 th, 27 th and 28 th March 2007. I sat with Judge  during two cases, the first, R v F, involved intercourse with a girl under the age of 13 and the second, R v H, involved a street robbery of an elderly woman. I saw the summing up of R v F and the swearing in of the jury and the start of R v H.
I had decided, prior to sitting with Judge  that I would see what evidence issues arose in the case or cases I witnessed and I would base my essay on this. The summing up of R v F provoked some interesting issues about the removal of the right to silence, I therefore decided to base my essay on section 34 CJPOA.
At this point I consulted Roberts and Zuckerman, Criminal Evidence, our module core textbook for a preliminary discussion on my chosen topic. It was very helpful in providing an outline of the way in which the right to silence had changed and its impact on defendants. I also consulted journals referred to at the bottom of the lecture handout and in the footnotes of Roberts and Zuckerman, Criminal Evidence. These included Birch Suffering in silence: a cost-benefit analysis of section 34 of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994, Jackson, J., Silence and Proof: Extending the Boundaries of Criminal Proceedings in the United Kingdom, Cape, E., Sidelining Defence Lawyers: Police Station Advice after Condron. These provided me with an interesting discussion on the policy issues surrounding the abolition of the absolute right to silence.
Through research, I realised that since the Criminal and Public Order Act 1994 the right to silence has been divided into pre-trial silence, and silence during the trial. I wished to focus on the relationship between the state as prosecutor and the citizen as defendant, so I decided to focus solely on the issue of pre-trial silence.
I then interviewed Judge , asking for his opinions on the abolition of the absolute right to silence. The interview with Judge , as well as the two cases I witnessed, formed the basis of my independent research (see appendix for notes).
I used the University of  library catalogue to access journals which dealt with the abolition of the right to silence. I found the following journals of particular use Cooper, S. , Legal Advice and Pre-trial Silence - Unreasonable Developments, O'Reilly, G.W. , England Limits the Right to Silence and Moves Towards an Inquisitorial System of Justice and Dennis, I. , The Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994: The Evidence Provisions. These further elucidated the general principles and scope of s34 and provided me with some useful analysis of cases.
I then completed the essay.