It is important, firstly, to understand exactly what I mean when I talk about the normalisation thesis. One important piece of research in this area is Parker et al (1998) and their book The normalisation thesis is concerned with the accommodation of recreational drug use into youth society. Recreational drug use "refers only to the use of certain drugs, primarily cannabis but also nitrates, amphetamines and equivocally LSD and ecstasy" The normalisation thesis does not mean that it has become normal for young people to take drugs, but is concerned with "the spread of deviant activity [drugs] and associated attitudes from the margins towards the centre" There has been a rise in drug trying since the 1990s, with six in ten Britons trying drugs by the age of 18, and the reason for this increase is the increased availability of drugs "in school, college, pub and club" Other theorists, such as Duff (who takes the normalisation thesis and extends it to Australian youth) also believe this to be the case, with a widespread increase in the use and experimentation of legal and illegal drugs among young people.
However, the normalisation thesis is not just concerned with actual experiences and rises in drug use, but attitudes towards drugs. Even those who choose not to do drugs still have considerable knowledge about the recreational drug scene, and are seen as 'drugwise'. They learn to draw distinctions between misuse of 'hard' drugs (heroin, crack cocaine) and 'sensible' recreational drug use, for example cannabis and (sometimes) pills. Drug use is seen as deviant, but it is accommodated, with the individualisation of drug use being tolerated as "it up to them if they want to kill themselves."
Moreover, the normalisation of drugs thesis can be seen as an example of postmodernism and post-subcultural theory Subcultural theory is no longer relevant in discussing drugs as it has moved from a small minority experience into a majority activity. The drug use described in the normalisation thesis is quite different due to its focus on recreational drug use.
In addition, this postmodern move into the mainstream is also seen through its absorption into consumer culture. The language and imagery of drugs has become absorbed into fashion, media, and music and the boundaries between licit and illicit behaviour has become blurred, as recreational drug use and drinking alcohol link together. Drug use takes place as part of this consumer lifestyle, with leisure time being an opportunity to express identity through the stylistic use of drugs. For example, the expression of identity is seen through the use, and normalisation, of recreation drugs within the current youth 'rave' scene. The consumption of drugs has become a "distinctive cultural identity".
However, the normalisation thesis, as presented by Parker, is not accepted by all. The significance of risk is associated with changes in late modernity, whereby the erosion of tradition (due to science and globalisation) has moved towards a society laden with uncertainty and constant risk as adolescents spend more time in a semi dependent state. Drugs decisions become routine and trivial. MacDonald and Marsh reject this individualism, believing that structural determinant, such as changing drug markets influence drug use.
It is this very focus on individualism that Pilkington rejects, who believes we should focus on the friendship group as a sight where drug decisions are made. The experience is "peer-group derived" The choices made about drugs are individual ones, but risk is not because youths are removed from traditional relations and structures but due to an "absence of secure intersubjective relations"
Moreover, both Shildrick and MacDonald and Marsh believe the term drugs normalisation is too broad a term and look towards ideas of "differential normalisation" Shildrick believed that normalization is too rigid and expansive a concept, homogenising youth drug use instead of understanding the complex relations young people have with drugs. All groups, similarly to Parker, generally accepted cannabis, but only 'spectacular' youths showed the tolerance and use described in Parker's thesis.
In studying whether drug use within youth culture has really become normalised, I decided to perform a qualitative, semi-structured interview, with a white, male, 21 year old work colleague (who currently goes to Birmingham University). As my study was on actual and perceived drug use, I was worried I may not get my subject to agree, especially as the respondent may want to be seen in a "favourable light".
Nevertheless, this is not to say there were not problems at all in gaining access. As the subject was on drug use, he found the idea of being recorded on such a sensitive (illegal) topic off-putting and therefore refused. Nonetheless, I still decided to proceed, following advice that "when faced with refusal [of recording] you should still go ahead".
Moreover, the illegality of the subject matter under discussion also brings about ethical questions. As a sociologist, I am responsible for the "social and psychological well-being of research participants". This concern for my research participant also led me to be as truthful and open to him as possible. I made James aware of his "right to refuse participation" In addition, due to the overt nature of my research I avoided the "moral qualms, anxieties, and practical difficulties"
However, I did not go into too much detail about the exact reasons for the interview. Other than informing him of the basic subject matter, and asking him to be as truthful as possible, I did not want to provide him with too much information so as not to influence his behaviour and responses.
Furthermore, it is important to remember aspects of reflexivity when partaking in research. "Good research is that which accounts for the conditions of its own production". As a researcher, I am part of the social world I am studying. My choice of research topic is influenced by my values and interests My preconceived experiences and attitudes towards drugs will have influenced my findings (although abstaining myself, I do not find others use of cannabis, if used sparingly, particularly problematic). I work with the knowledge I have, and cannot escape the social world I live in; therefore it is na
Moreover, my research, and concern with reflexivity, has been influenced by the particular methodology I have decided to use (showing a link between theory and method). My research is qualitative (although there is some statistical data present in my literature review) and concerned with subjective social meanings given by James to actions and events related to his experiences of drugs. In addition, the normalisation thesis is not just based around actual drug use, but Therefore it is important for James to tell his 'story' and the interview process should allow room for narrative and a "sociology of stories".
Therefore, it is important the interview structure allows for adequate expression of subjective experience and narrative. As a piece of qualitative research, I used a semi-structured, flexible schedule that allowed James to give me "rich detailed answers". For example, with no prompting from me, James started to discuss whether drugs should be legalised; "the government should give you information but the state should not make that decision for you".
However, although wanting to find out James' opinions and narration around drugs, I also want to find out his It is important that I did not use leading questions (324). Moreover, I tried to make him feel as comfortable as possible throughout the interview and develop a rapport with him to "minimize reactivity" (Hammersley and Atkinson, 2005:265) I wanted valid, honest, reliable and truthful answers (which may have been problematic to gain due to the illegality of discussion). He did seem uncomfortable at the beginning of the interview and I worried that his "answers may be deceptive" (Hammersley and Atkinson, 2005: 154) with him simply trying to give responses that painted himself in a particular light. However, as the interview progressed he seemed to become more and more comfortable, moving on from giving short succinct answers to more developed responses, including one story of when he had been offered drugs by his friends:
James had smoked cannabis (seen by Parker as a recreational drug He has smoked it at a house party in the back garden; "I though it was just a complete fuss over nothing, not very exciting at all, I went back to drinking my beer! It didn't really have that much affect." James is more of an 'abstainer' according to Parker's thesis, (having only tried cannabis once), but does indeed to know about recreational drugs and is 'drugwise'. He sees it as 'normal' for adolescents to take recreational drugs and his attitude towards them shows he found them to be deviant, but tolerable:
However, his experiences of drugs were, I believe influenced by class (which do not seem to correlate with a postmodern, individualistic view of drugs) Similarly to Shildrick James came from a middle-class background "well-off, nice house, decent school" and did not take drugs until he was at University, and even then it was two years into his degree, at the age of 21, when he finally decided to have one solitary try. Although youth is getting longer The people who did take drugs were the ones outside those he knew from his Grammar School:
Unfortunately, as I have only done one interview as a case study, I cannot really locate separate types of youths (perhaps based on class) as Shildrick did, however, this one interview does seem to suggest that there is a differentiated normalisation of drugs based on class difference and "complexity and diversity in young people's experiences."
Moreover, all of James experiences with drugs took place within the context of the peer group. James had been offered drugs in a club and did find this type of behaviour normal, (which does correspond with the normalisation thesis' emphasis on consumption of drugs in the 'rave' atmosphere However, the time James' actually smoked cannabis had nothing to do with the 'rave' scene, and was at a house party, and another time (at the age of 17) he was offered it whilst sitting in some woods watching his friends smoke. This corresponds with Pilkington's All his experiences happened with friends, not alone, and he eventually tried it because he was in the mood, and felt "curious".
However, in line with the normalisation thesis, he did believe that image was portrayed through consumerism and the use of drugs.