The aim of this essay is to explore the roles these stratifications play within the women's movement, and would argue that it is possible for women's movement to work with these intersections, if identified, to fight women's subordination and promote women's empowerment. To do this, the essay will discuss the global women's movement, and explore women's movements in a national context. It will then discuss the differences within the women's movements, applying global arguments to Uganda. The essay will examine the key concepts of ethnicity and class, and analyse their roles within women's movements using case studies from Uganda. Furthermore, it will attempt to identify the factors that led to successful mobilization and draw lessons from relevant strategies adopted. Finally, it will recommend strategies for future engagements leading to successful mobilization towards women's empowerment.
To answer the question effectively, it is important to define the key concepts, which are, class, ethnicity, women's movement and social change. Although these concepts have been widely used by scholars, their definition is always contested and problematic. This essay will however not address these issues in detail, due to constraints on number of words.
In discussing women's movements, this essay will draw on literature from across the globe in order to understand the trend in various women's movements, but will focus on women's movements in Uganda. The choice of Uganda is because historically, the country has been intensely politicised along ethnic and religious divide, learning from the past, women's movements sought to build bridges across ethnic, religious and class divide (Tripp 2000b), thus these differences have not deterred women in Uganda from organizing collectively to promote women's rights issues.
Gender, class and ethnic divisions are interrelated as each division presents ideological and organisational principles within which the others operate, although in different historical contexts and different social arenas their roles will differ. The combination of gender and class, and ethnicity and class will operate in the relationship between gender and ethnic divisions (Anthias and Yuval-Davis 1992:111). As noted by Hooks (1997:486) women are divided by class and ethnicity, sustained woman bonding can only be achieved when these divisions are confronted and the necessary steps are taken to eliminate them. The question here is, can women's movement transcend these differences and work together as a group with common problems? Proceeding sections will attempt to answer this question and would argue that, women's groups can rise above all differences, because only then can they fight against discrimination and gain the much anticipated equality in all development processes.
The combination of gender and class, and ethnicity and class, will operate in the relationship between gender and ethnic divisions. As noted by Hooks (1997) women are divided by class and ethnicity, sustained woman bonding can only be achieved when these divisions are confronted and the necessary steps are taken to eliminate them. The question here is, can women's movement transcend these differences and work together as a group with common problems? Proceeding sections will attempt to answer this question and would argue that, women's groups can rise above all differences, because only then can they fight against discrimination and gain the much anticipated recognition in all development processes.
The intersecting factors of class and ethnicity play a major role in determining the success or failure of women's movements (Wieringa, 1995:2).
From the above discussions, it is obvious that women's movements in Uganda and Africa will have to negotiate on issues where there is sufficient unity of interest due to gender, despite other causes of division (Johnson-Odim, 1991:322). As in the case of the Savings Club of Women in Kampala, the group was able to work across class and ethnic divides, to improve the lives of women.
What were some of the factors that enabled these groups to transcend class and ethnicity? First, the recognition that there was diversity, and taking this into consideration in the groups activities towards achieving set objectives. Secondly, the realisation of the different needs of members of the group, and interest of women of different ages and religions helped the group develop strategies that were sensitive to the needs of all.
In order for women's groups to work across class and ethnic boundaries, they need to be aware that women are not only victims of patriarchy, but they perpetuate patriarchy and subordinate other women (Murthy, 2004:15). I would say that, this is very true in most African societies. Where mothers-in-law controls the activities of daughters-in-law, in case of participation in women's movement, some young women are not involved, and so will not benefit from such programmes, either as a result of instructions by the mother-in-law to stay behind and prepare food, or due to the burden of household chores.
To ensure success in mobilization groups need to deal with issues experienced by poor and non-poor women to ensure inclusiveness. To encourage poor women to participate in group activities, such as micro credit schemes, implementing organisations need to modify the rules, so as to allow women who cannot save at all or who can save only small amounts to join and introduce additional savings for the better-off women (Murthy, 2004:15), as in the case of women farmers in Uganda.
Examples from Uganda shows that women have sought linkages that transcend differences like class and ethnicity in order to build broad-based movements to achieve popular goals (Tripp, 2000:672), but these examples are few compared to many other groups that have not been able to live above these differences. The examples, however proves that it is possible for women's groups to work across class and ethnic boundaries, in doing so, they will be building a strong movement that will work in unity to promote the rights of women and challenge patriarchy, leading to gender equality.