Despite remarkable rise in female labour force participation and a persistent, though slow movement towards greater equality in society, household work remains highly segregated and predominantly a woman's responsibility. Over the past decades, research has recorded a decrease in time women spend on household work, but evidence from several researches carried out shows that women still do more work compared to men.
This essay addresses two important questions in the area of domestic and care work in the household. Firstly, why is it that globally, women continue to shoulder the major burden of domestic and care work in the household, and secondly how can this phenomenon be explained? To answer the questions, the essay will investigate feminist theories on sexual division of labour, drawing specifically on three major feminist theories, the essay will compare research data from various regions of the world on sexual division of labour, to explore the reasons why women continue to shoulder the major burden of domestic and care work. Furthermore, it will discuss women and men's perceptions of fairness of domestic division of labour. The paper draws its conclusion from available data and argues that there have been a slight change in domestic division of labour between women and men, but this change remains very insignificant in measuring gender inequalities and the subordination of women.
Since the early 1920s many feminist have attempted to search for the origin of unequal and hierarchical relationships in society in general and the asymmetric division of labour between men and women in particular, this has been an unmentionable field (Mies, 1998). Various theories and ideologies have been developed to explain this anomaly. In this section, I will attempt to review various feminist theoretical approaches.
The aim of this section is to analyse research data on domestic and care work from different regions of the world to verify a global trend of the phenomenon that women continue to shoulder the major burden of household work.
The essay will rely on the following research reports: - Davis and Greenstein's research on cross-national variations in the division of household labour, using data from the International Social Justice Project. The research investigated the division of household labour in married couple households, using samples from 13 nations; Western nations (Great Britain, West Germany, and the Netherlands), former Soviet nations (Russia, Slovenia, Estonia, Bulgaria, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and East Germany) and an Asian nation (Japan). Other researches used for the analysis focused on the following countries United States, Israel and Sweden and Third World nations, South Korea, Indonesia, the Philippines and Taiwan.
Next, I would examine factors predicting the division of household labour in different nations. According to Coltrane (2000) in contrast to research conducted in earlier decades, 1990's studies find that men's share of housework has several consistent predictors, including women's employment patterns, ideology, and earnings, followed by men's employment hours and ideology. Other predictors of men's relative share of housework, includes age, life-course issues, marital status, and children influence the relative share of housework performed by men.
Though women carry out two thirds of the total household labour, only about one third of them rate their division of labour as unfair (Coltrane, 2000). In a study carried out by Zuo and Bians on 'gendered resources, division of housework, and perceived fairness - a case in urban China', focused on equity theory and gender construction perspective, similar to those used in earlier discussions in this essay. Equity theory assessed husbands and wives' sense of justice by comparing the material-based resources each spouse brings to the marriage (Zuo and Bians, 2001). According to this theory, wives low sense of injustice is due to their lack of comparable resources and dependence on their husbands for financial support (Lenno and Rosenfield, 1994; Thompsons, 1991 cited in Zuo and Bians 2001). Gender construction theory, on the other hand, affirms that culturally entrenched and socially constructed gendered meaning of housework perpetuates male advantage, while preserving the perception of the inequality as fair (Thompson, 1991; Wilkie, Ferre, Ratchiff, 1998 cited in Zuo and Bian, 2001)
Neither the gender construction theory nor the equity theory completely explains the discrepancy between the distribution of household labour and judgements regarding its equity. Gender theory for instance assumes that housework is hard and that anyone would avoid it when possible (Zuo and Bian, 2001). This did not however explain the dual earner situations in which wives have relatively more resources but still do more housework (Brines, 1994). Gender theory attempts to complement equity theory by highlighting the gendered meaning of housework, but it is yet to account for what motivates wives to accept the unequal housework division that seems to preserve 'male privilege' and 'female disadvantage' (Zuo and Bian, 2001).
Zuo and Bian's (2001) research found that, though the wives carried out more chores than their husbands, few perceived this difference as unfair, and also that the unequal division of housework did not necessarily bring into play a sense of unfairness, but that one's failure to perform the culturally prescribed role did. In line with these findings, the research showed a considerable sharing of household tasks by husbands. Nevertheless, the husbands' participation in housework still does not measure up to that of their wives, given that 90% of wives hold full time jobs. Husbands' domestic labour seems unrelated to their relative economic resources.
According to Zuo and Bian gendered ideology produces gendered resources in the exchange of paid work for unpaid work between spouses in Beijing. The husband, whose gendered benefit yield more power from status and financial contributions, claims lighter or no housework responsibility. The wife, whose gendered advantage yields more power from domestic work, is released from an equal sharing of the breadwinner responsibility. Neither men, who believe to have failed, increase performance in domestic tasks, nor women who climb the corporate ladder in both salary and status are able to turn their work into valued resources in marital exchange. On the contrary, their work is viewed as a debt to their spouse because they have breached gender boundaries. Thus men are reluctant to participate equally in domestic work even if their breadwinner status has diminished. By the same reasoning, working-women assume a greater domestic workload without feeling deprived (Zuo and Bian, 2001).
From the above, a conclusion can be drawn that Chinese women accept the unequal distribution of housework not because they lack economic resources or passively follow traditional gender rules at their expense. Instead, like Western women are active agents with interests and stake in creating and maintaining a certain gender order (Zuo and Bian, 2001).
In the process of marital exchange, the study finds that women do compare their gendered resources with those of their husbands. A failure of a husband to fulfil the provider role may increase the value of his wife's resources, while reducing his own, leaving his wife with a sense of unfairness on his part. All this depends on how resources are defined within the household (Zuo and Bian, 2001), and how women have been socialized to combine their waged work effectively with household work, this could actually explain why, full time working women still perform a large share of domestic work in order to maintain an accepted gender regime within the household.
Baxter's research found that women spend 24hours per week on housework compared to 9hours per week for men. Similarly in relation to childcare, women report spending more than twice as much time on childcare than men. Nevertheless, most women and men consider the arrangements as fair, although the results show that women are significantly more likely to perceive them more unfair than men (Baxter, 2000). An analysis of the main factors predicting men's and women's perceptions of fairness show that both men and women's perception of fairness are based primarily on the distribution of household work. This Baxter suggested is a more significant factor in determining house hold division of labour than time availability, he also noted that men and women tend to take women's contributions in the home for granted, and look to men's level of involvement as the critical factor in determining if the domestic division of labour is fair (Baxter, 2000). This is true, if one relates it to women's roles being defined as natural because of their natural functions.
However, research in the 1990s isolated circumstances associated with labelling divisions of household labour as ''fair'' or ''unfair.'' Some also call attention to measurement problems in the area of fairness evaluations. Resource theories and their derivatives envisage how people make fairness evaluations about housework.(Coltrane, 2000) Classical exchange theory suggests that women will see as fair those situations in which they are doing the smallest amount of housework and unfair those in which they are doing the most (Suitor, 1991). Equity theory speculates that partners will feel uncomfortable with situations in which they are either over- or under-benefited, suggesting that both men and women will see as most fair those situations in which they share the household labour almost equally (Pina and Bengtson, 1993). Challenges to these theories come from studies showing that even employed women tend to label unbalanced divisions of labour as fair, and from research showing that men who do little persist in seeing the allocation of household tasks as fair (Ward, 1993).
Findings differ on how much men and women pay attention to their own contributions, but most studies find that when one spouse does less and the other does more, the chances of perceiving unfairness increases (Dancer &amp; Gilbert, 1993; John et al., 1995; Robinson and Spitze, 1992). In contrast, as men do more of the occasional tasks (such as washing the car) both spouses are more likely to judge the division of household labour as fair to wives (DeMaris and Longmore, 1996). Fairness evaluations are also influenced by employment, education, and ideology (Coltrane, 2000). Some research find that men's greater employment hours are related to their own evaluations of fairness in the division of household labour (Ward, 1993). Others find that men's greater employment hours are concurrent to their evaluations of unfairness (Robinson and Spitze, 1992). DeMaris and Longmore found that husbands' greater employment hours, relative to wives', encourage wives (but not husbands) to see the division of housework as fair to her (DeMaris and Longmore, 1996). Women with less education than their husbands, and those who perceive the costs of leaving the marriage to be high, perceive more fairness (Lennon and Rosenfield, 1994; Wilkie et al., 1998). Higher levels of education for both spouses are associated with seeing less fairness in the division of labour (DeMaris and Longmore, 1996; John et al., 1995; Robinson &amp; Spitze, 1992). From the above, it is obvious that fairness in household work is determined, by the type and amount of work performed by husbands and wives, their educational background, their work status and their gender ideologies.
Dissatisfaction with the household division of labour may be a more important catalyst for change than perceptions of its unfairness. Men are almost universally satisfied with the division of housework, whereas women are often less satisfied, especially if they hold egalitarian attitudes and like their paid work (Baxter &amp; Western, 1998). Although findings about fairness evaluations vary considerably, the majority of studies in the 1990s concluded that the single most important predictor of a wife's fairness evaluation is what portion of the routine housework her husband contributes (Coltrane, 2000). I would argue that gender ideology plays a major role in justifying how women and men perceive fairness of household work. If men and women believe that domestic labour is women's responsibility, then it will be comparatively easy to justify a situation in which women do the bulk of the work. Research has found for example that men justify their lack of involvement in terms of incompetence, lower standards or lack of time (Sherpe, 1984). In situations where the woman is employed, works more hours, and earns more than the husband earns, but still perform more work at home, it is difficult to justify that time is an important determinant of fairness, I would argue that gender cultures and ideologies proffer better explanations to women's perceived fairness in this case.
Several researches have shown that women consider domestic work to be a form of family care and devote considerable energy to it; women's performance of housework is guided by an ethic of care, which entails various family members and are often demonstrated through the activities of meal preparation, food shopping, cleaning, washing clothes and child tendering (Ferree, 1990; Stohs, 1994). Other studies reveal that, for women, feeding their families is a display of love and motherhood that involves considerable time, effort, and energy, an approach much less common among men who do this work (DeVault, 1991). This definition tends to promote the approach that socialization plays a major role in determining how housework is defined and shared between women and men, and reiterates the finding that gender ideology plays a major role in women's attitude to household work.
The differences in household division of labour is associated with different approaches discussed earlier, although women's share of housework in all countries investigated remains high, culture, relative resource, time availability and gender ideologies remain important factors in determining the level of equality of gender division of household work and care.
Although recent trends on studies of housework, suggest there has been a change in the average level of housework done by women. (Bianchi et al.; 2000; Gershuny &amp; Robinson, 1988; Robinson and Godbey, 1997 cited in Artis and Pavalko, 2003) Change has been slow, and women continue to shoulder greater responsibility for household labour (Shelton &amp; John, 1996 cited in Artis and Pavalko, 2003). I would argue that these results indicate that change has taken place in household division of labour but this change has been slow, due to gender ideologies, economic and relative resources, and time availability. It seems very difficult to change these ideologies, as men are reluctant to adjust to evolving change in gender roles, for fear of loosing the power they have so enjoyed over the years. Unbelievably, men are determined to remain in control and the easiest way to do this is to continue to promote patriarchy and domination over women, in whatever form it is possible. Nevertheless, the fact remains that division of household work between women and men is beginning to change, no matter how slow it has been.