Debates about research relying on the experiences of women have dominated feminists' discourses for years. Feminists challenged traditional research methods that ignore women's experiences, and argue that for any research to lead to improved lives of women it must privilege women's voices. Thus giving rise to feminist 'epistemologies', indicating its diversity; this also has raised interesting debates amongst feminist researchers. The challenge for feminist researchers has been how women's knowledge can be produced without biases and not privileging the researcher as the 'knower of knowledge'. The aim of this essay is to evaluate the life story research which produced a book - 'Nisa: The Life and Words of a !Kung Woman' by Shostak Marjorie, and establish the relationship between research design, epistemology, and power and ethics in the research process.
The essay is structured into five parts. The first section gives background information of the exotic life story of Nisa as illustrated in the book. The second section will discuss the research design in relation to current feminist methods. The third section will discuss epistemology, while the fourth section will discuss power and ethics in the research process. While these sections are clearly distinguished, the essay will at every point make a link between each of the issues discussed. The last section which is the conclusion will reflect on the overall issues discussed and would argue that Nisa's story gives the reader insight into the life of the !Kung woman, although the authenticity of her story remains in conflict with the author, as she continuously warns that the story does not represent the whole range of experience available to women in !Kung culture(Shostak, 1990:43). This only reflects one of the dilemmas in research methods. However, her ability to confirm Nisa's stories gives credit to the research output.
According to De Vaus the function of research design is to ensure that the evidence obtained from research enables the researcher to answer the initial research questions clearly (2001:9). For Punch, research design is the basic plan for a piece of research, and has four main parts: the strategy, the conceptual framework, who or what will be studied, and finally the tools and procedures to be used for collecting and analysing empirical materials (2005:63).
Harding defined epistemology as the theory of knowledge, that seeks to answer questions of the source of knowledge, and who will be accepted as an appropriate generator of legitimate knowledge and on what grounds? Feminists have accused traditional epistemology of ignoring the experience of women in research. They proposed feminist epistemology, which is an alternative theory of knowledge that legitimates women as 'knowers' (1987a:3). Harding identifies two types of epistemologies: 'feminist empiricist' and 'feminist standpoint' (1987b:182). Feminist empiricism stresses the continuities between traditional justifications of scientific research and feminist ones. In contrast, feminist standpoint stresses the continuities between the radical upheavals in social understanding created by nineteenth-century class struggles and those created by feminist inquiry. The differences that exist between them reflect the struggles in mainstream discourses between liberal and Marxist theories of human nature and politics. Both epistemologies are attempting to produce a feminist science that is complete and undistorted (Harding, 1987b:186-187)
Many feminists have defined feminist standpoint from different perspectives. Marxian epistemology for instance claims that to acquire knowledge of a phenomenon one must be in a position to experience the phenomenon and its effects. Many feminists have criticised this position for its gender blindness. Hartsock drawing from the Marxian ideology argues that women's superior way of knowing derives from their position in sexual division of labour (1983:284). This claim is similar to that made by Rose, who acknowledged the central role of emotional involvement in the process of knowledge acquisition (1983:84). The theory of experience has support of other feminists. For Smith what makes women's experience valuable from an epistemic viewpoint is their dual marginal and central position in the current set of social relations, which sustains the current patriarchal systems (1988:81).
Harding (1991) and Bar On (1993) however, argue that the claim that women have a set of experiences presupposes that women have essential features that ignore the important differences among women. This view is shared by Spelman (1990) and Tanesini who propose that women are different, and that the version of standpoint theory based on shared experiences underestimates the importance of differences between women (1999:147).
Women's experiences in traditional social science recognises that social science ask questions about social life that appears problematic from within the social experiences that are characterized by men (white, Western, bourgeois), who ask only those questions about nature and social life which (white, Western, bourgeois) men want answered (Harding, 1987a:6). This perspective is reflected in the !Kung research, as observed by Shostak, researchers who worked in the !Kung community did not cover aspects of their way of life, especially from the perspective of women (Shostak, 1990:5). In relation to the case study, defining what is in need of scientific explanation from the perspective of men's experiences leads to partial understanding of social life (Harding, 1987a:6). Obviously, researching the life of !Kung women has proved that it is only from women that the experiences of women is expected to be revealed. Within these experiences, there are multiple realities of women's lives, which provide an explanation for the different experiences recounted by women interviewed by Shostak (Harding, 1987a:7).
Some feminist argue that standpoint should not rely only on experiences, as generalising experience has the tendency of making invisible the experiences of marginalised groups of women (Tanesini, 1999: 147). As argued by Scott experience is fallible and therefore questionable, hence cannot be taken as a ground for all knowledge, because this would amount to ignoring its constructed nature (1992:25). Harding's strong objectivity however sees feminist standpoint not as arising consciously from women's experiences but rather as a politically chosen social location, thus knowledge production is deliberately partial (1993:72). Nisa's account therefore could be said to reflect how the researcher judged stories told by the other women, and how Nisa's story is validated to produce knowledge of the life of !Kung women. Although Shostak acknowledged that Nisa's stories could be distorted as she had doubts over Nisa's account of her childhood (1990:31), but according to Harding, some standpoint are less distorted than others and can therefore be a starting point for knowledge production (1991:185). This implies that Nisa's story represents a starting point for knowledge on the life of !Kung women.
Shostak choice of researching women authenticates that standpoint is political, as it begins from the position of people who have been marginalised from previous researches conducted in the community. This standpoint explains the choice of research method that was adopted. Which enabled the researcher to obtain information from the women on a wide range of issues pertaining to their life? The range of participants selected for the study is informed by experiences of women. The above discussions suggest that defining epistemology and adopting the views of most feminist that research should start from women's experience within a social context will influence the research design process.
Some feminists have proposed that researchers should link ethics, methods, methodologies and epistemology. For Code, there are ethical issues involved in research relationships, as well as in being accountable within the varied sets of relations that comprise any given research project (1987:10). From the beginning of a research and after completion, a researcher and their work exist in many complex sets of relationships. In recognising these multiple contexts, which influence the research process, there are potential conflicts of interests. The researcher has the responsibility of being accountable not only to research participants but also to those who read, re-interpret and take seriously the claim that the research makes (Doucet and Mauthner, 2002:125). Doucet and Mauthner argue that reflexivity holds together methodology, epistemology and ethics. The researcher has to be transparent within the wider context of reflexivity (2002:125). In the epilogue chapter of the case study under review, Shostak reflected on the dilemmas of interpreting the data she collected, and how representative and true where Nisa's story of !Kung life style. The other major issue was her obligation to discuss with Nisa her intention of publishing her life story (1990:350). These accounts give the reader an insight into the dilemmas that took place before, during, and after the research process, and I will view this as being accountable and transparent.
An analysis of the research on !Kung women as reflected in the book - 'Nisa: The Life and Words of a !Kung Woman', clearly shows evidence of the interrelationship, between research design, epistemology, and ethics and power in the research process. It is justifiable to say that the research answered the research questions. Despite difficulties in carrying out the research and some dilemmas that arose during the process, the researcher was able to problemitise and deal with problems. Her reflexivity is a confirmation of her research skills and display of professionalism. The fact remains that researching live stories will continue to present varied challenges to researchers, as human life is not static.