In an attempt to study the effects of preterm birth on cognitive and motor development, a cohort study took data on all infants with a gestational age at birth of 32 weeks or less and weighing 2 kgs or less at birth born in 1980 or 1981 to mothers resident in the county of Merseyside. Several children were excluded from the study for various reasons, leaving 121 infants in the study. Scores from IQ and reading comprehension tests were recorded to measure the infants' cognitive development, while a test of motor impairment was conducted to measure motor development. Four birth characteristics were recorded - birthweight, birthweight ratio (calculated by actual birth weight divided by expected birth weight), gestational age and sex. In addition, four social characteristics were observed - whether the mother left education before or at age 16, whether the mother lived in owner-occupied housing, whether the family received social service benefits and whether the mother was a non-smoker.
An initial exploratory analysis gave an indication of the different relationships between the variables. Both IQ and reading comprehension score showed similar patterns, increasing with birthweight ratio and also being affected by the social characteristics. This suggests that cognitive development is affected by birthweight ratio. The exploratory analysis also showed that infants with better educated mothers and those in a more affluent family tended to have a higher IQ or reading comprehension score. In terms of motor development, test of motor impairment score appeared to depend more on the birth characteristics of birth weight and gestational age, with the social characteristics having no effect. Sex did not appear to have an effect on either cognitive or motor development. The exploratory analysis also indicated that collinearity in the data - particularly between birthweight, birthweight ratio and gestational age - could prove a problem when modelling the data.
Initial model fitting for IQ, reading comprehension score and test of motor impairment score involved doing individual linear regressions of each of these variables on each of the four birth characteristics. These regressions confirmed the initial observations of the exploratory analysis. Birthweight and birthweight ratio both showed clear positive linear relationships with IQ, while none of the birth characteristics had a significant relationship with reading comprehension score. Test of motor impairment depended heavily on both birthweight and gestational age. However, none of these individual models proved to be a particularly good fit for the data. All of the models did not explain that much of the variation in the data and included a number of large outlying residuals and demonstrated clear signs of deviating from Normality. This seemed to indicate that modelling the response variables on just one predictor was not a particularly good choice of model. A better model would need to take into account a combination of the observed variables, although the selection of the variables to be considered would need to be done carefully due to the potential collinearity in the data set.
To select the variables to be involved in modelling each of the response variables, all subsets regression was used to select a subset of the birth characteristics for each model. Considering both Mallow's Cp statistic and adjusted r-squared, the variables birthweight, birthweight ratio and gestational age were chosen to predict IQ, while birthweight ratio alone was chosen for reading comprehension score. Test of motor impairment score appeared to be modelled best by birthweight ratio and gestational age. For IQ and test of motor impairment score, the additional variables seemed to result in a better, but not perfect, model. Further consideration by performing all subsets regressions, this time including the social characteristics as possible variables, improved the models further. The final three models selected were :
All of the coefficients in the above models are significant at the 5% level with the exception of Sex in the IQ model (which is significant at the 11% level) and owner in the RComp model (which is significant at the 6% level). IQ increases with birthweight ratio, with an increase of 1 corresponding to an increase in IQ of 22.739 points. IQ differs between the genders, with males having a lower IQ by 3.277 points. In terms of social characteristics, having a mother who left education at or before the age of 16 equates to a 7.452 point decrease in IQ, having a mother living in owner-occupied accommodation equates to a 5.373 point increase and living in a family receiving social service benefits equates to a 8.970 point decrease. Similarly, having a mother who left education at or before the age of 16 equates to a 10.209 point decrease in reading comprehension score, having a mother living in owner-occupied accommodation equates to a 6.063 point increase and living in a family receiving benefits equates to a 9.562 point decrease. Test of motor impairment score depends heavily on birthweight ratio and gestational age, with an increase in ratio of 1 corresponding to a 4.725 decrease in ToMI score and an increase in gestational age of one week corresponding to a 0.469 decrease.
Generally, it appears as though cognitive development depends heavily on the social background of the infant. Reading comprehension score appears to depend almost completely on social background, indicating that improvement in this area is affected heavily by the environment in which they are raised rather than the effect of preterm birth. The other measure of cognitive development, IQ, does appear to be affected heavily by birthweight ratio, suggesting that preterm birth can have an effect on general cognitive development. On the other hand, motor development does not appear to be based heavily on social background, with the chosen model suggesting it is mainly affected by birth characteristics. Infants who are born closer to term and who weigh more than expected display better motor skills.
The study has some significant limitations. The final models arrived at are still not totally satisfactory. While the model for IQ seems to fit pretty well, the models for the other two variables show non-Normality and evidence of non-constant variance, suggesting that some of the assumptions of modelling have been violated. This casts doubts on the reliability and usefulness of the final models. A key assumption of linear regression is that the variables being modelled follow a Normal distribution. This did not appear to be the case for reading comprehension score and test of motor impairment score, so a generalised linear model may be a better approach to modelling these variables. In particular, in the case of test of motor impairment score, a log-linear model may be more appropriate. It may also be worth examining interactions between the independent variables, or looking at quadratic effects.
One concern when examining the data is that gestational age is measured in weeks. A more useful variable might be gestational age measured in days, which would allow for further analysis of this birth characteristic. This might prove be an interesting extension of the study.
Furthermore, since the study only considered those infants born with a gestational age of 32 weeks or under and those weighing under 2kg, the model can only be applied to predicting infants in this range. The results of the findings of the study cannot be extended to infants born at term or afterwards. The data set does not appear to be that representative of the general population, with an average IQ of below 100 and higher proportions of the social characteristics than would be expected. An interesting and useful extension of the study would be to consider data from all births, allowing further application of the model.