This essay explores the questions and solutions triggered by the issue of reparations for slavery and the racist aspects of colonization on a global scale, taking arguments from the precedents of reparations cases in the United States, the ongoing debates in France and at the international scale.
Until recently, the question of reparations has not been considered as a global one. Our task will be to question the possibilities of creating a global regime of reparations for slavery; the main obstacle in the establishment of a global regime of reparations is being the identification of the claimants as individuals or as a group, of the entity (government, state, corporation) or the people (individuals living in a society) who to be given reparations. This issue is not only about allocating financial reparations from one group to another; it also reveals the conception of justice we have today, the role of human rights in the shaping of a new idea of justice, the relation between law and justice and the importance of justice as the foundation of a sustainable development.
How to build a global regime of reparations when the disparities in the treatment of different cases seem to be irreconcilable? For instance, Native American and Inuit claims of land ownership were accepted and legitimated while the interned Japanese Canadian during WWII received compensation; so did Israel from Germany for the suffering endured by the Jews under the Nazi regime. But the question of reparations not only for the African Americans but the Africans from the continent, who still suffer today from the injustice of slavery, slave trade and the racist aspect of colonization, is highly disputed. In France, the question of reparations is of another type. The French society faces conflicting memories, individual and collective, in relation to the colonial past and its present effects. The aim of the memorial laws which I will describe in the next sections is to acknowledge the injustice done in the name of colonization by the state. The recognition of slavery as a crime against humanity has only been used as a legal instrument to compel the French government to give compensation by the M.I.R (International Movement for Reparations), a movement based in Martinique.
The reparations can be asked because of the official violation of rights undertaken by governments as a systematic policy in the past.
At a global scale, the recognition of slavery and slave trade as a crime against humanity - which has no prescription - can ground a legal claim for reparations provided to the descendants of victims of severe violations of their basic human rights during the slave trade and colonization. The moral argument which has been debated by many scholars and justice theorists seems to be undisputable. Every moral agent today is aware that colonization and slavery were unjust and wrong. The political argument is present but questionable. Are the apologies or 'regrets' offered by the French President and the British Prime Minister sincere or fashionable?
The question remains: What kind of reparations is due and to whom? Is a theory of reparations for ancient wrongs applicable in reality? If it is material, then this material gain for descendants of slaves who suffer from racial discrimination should not turn out to be a new type of injustice for other groups.
This essay tries to encapsulate (I) the philosophical grounds of a fair and sustainable regime of reparations for descendants of victims of slavery and racist aspects of colonization and (II) the practicality and feasibility of a legal regime of reparations.
What are the practical implications and the difficulties raised by these theories? Let us imagine that the principle of reparations be accepted as legitimate. The first issue concerns the type of reparations.
The first step in building such a regime is to identify the injustices which result from slavery and the racist aspects of colonization which need to be rectified today. There are two types of realities: the quantifiable ones and the non-quantifiable ones. We can observe the HDI (Human Development Index) concerning the former colonized states of Africa and the African American population, and analyse the causes of the inequalities between these groups and the world average. For instance, Black children in the USA have a life expectancy 6 times lower than White children, a Black woman has more than 3 times as many chances to die during childbirth, the number of Black families living under the poverty line is 4 times superior to White families, and the unemployment rate among Black people is 3 times superior to the Whites'. Poverty is not natural. It is a historical construct.
The way to repair these inequalities would be to invest in the health and care services and in the education system so as to make them accessible to the poor population.
But let us now focus on the three main perspectives: the legal, political and human rights one.
The purpose of this essay was to question the philosophical grounds of a regime of reparations for slavery and the racist aspect of colonization and to envisage its practical feasibility. The question of reparations, broader than its financial aspect, is a challenge for the peaceful and reconciled coexistence between nations in a globalized world. Should we hold former colonial states liable for the past injustices or focus on the reconciliation among nations? The same debate occurs in ICL. What is the priority: to condemn the people responsible or to build reconciliation?