The concept of security has substantially evolved since the end of the Cold War. Far from a traditional, realistic, militarised and state-centred concept, the debate now includes a comprehensive approach to security problems. This evolution can be seen as a real opportunity to minimize the importance of the sovereign state in the concern problematic of human security. But it also contains several pitfalls. If everything that causes a decline in human well-being is labelled a 'security' threat, the term loses any analytical usefulness and becomes vaguely synonymous with 'bad'. In this essay I will try to question the polemical nature of global security through the securitization of the environment. The notion of environmental security is considered today as an issue of global security. The problem is that both concepts of environmental security and global security are used as if they were self-evident. What are the implications of the securitization of the environment on the perception of what global security is? Behind the label of 'global security', we imply not a utopian consensual cooperation of all the nations toward the betterment of everyone's security, but rather a discourse, a way for the powers to impose their views and maintain the status quo.
In order to challenge the accepted concept of global security, I analyze it as a discourse as defined by Foucault. Then, in order to further analyze how this specific discourse develops, I focus the study on the implication of the securitization of the environment, more precisely of 'sustainable development' as a narrative within the global security discourse.
Analyzing global security as a discourse enables us to think of its conditions of implementation and its effects in the maintenance of the international status quo. Contextualized within a specific power relation between the North and the South which rely on a specific international legal system, global security loses its consensual appearance and reveals the features of domination at stake. It is only one among the various discourses that shape socio-legal international relations. Indeed, power relations take place in a linkage of discourses. Analysing narratives on environment securitization and on sustainable development allowed to highlight how complex and intertwined the notions at play are.