This paper addresses the colonial shape of the skilled-workers migration from the South to the North. The thesis of this study is that the brain drain constitutes a loss for developing countries and benefits the developed countries and that this type of movement of resources (human capital) from the South (sending countries) to the North (receiving countries) is the 'reproduction' (Bourdieu) of a colonial pattern of exploitation, that will be analysed from a Marxian perspective. What is at stake is the way capitalism, as an ideology, that has the capacity to renew itself (Boltanski, Chiapello), can use new means of exploitation. It is important to acknowledge that this type of migration is completely voluntary and legal. This is precisely the nature of this new form of exploitation: it works, through incentives, on the will of high skilled workers from the South, where their home country cannot afford to offer them the wages they expect, to improve their standards of living abroad.
After discussing the reality of the brain drain and its effects, the myth of the brain gain and the existence of a brain waste, using empirical findings and theoretical studies (I), the reasons why the brain drain is the reproduction of a colonial pattern of exploitation will be assessed (II). The possible responses that international law and a global labour movement can eventually give to this type of exploitation will be analysed (III).
In this section I envisage the complexity of the phenomenon of the brain drain, the debates concerning the losses and gains due to the brain drain and conclude by the assertion that the brain drain is the transfer of the human capital from the South to the North.
I will try to demonstrate the link between the aftermaths of the( colonization, which I believe is not over(, but occurs differently than in the past, in the present postcolonial context; a Marxian approach of the brain drain (as the exploitation of the skills rather than the physical force) an the 'reproduction' of this model of international relations with the Bourdieusian concept of 'symbolic violence'.
This section focuses on the questions that can be asked to a 'reflexive' labour law and a global labour movement, for a less exploitive relationship between high-skilled workers from the South and the capitalist economies of the North, that would benefit in the first place the home countries of the South and their population, but also to the migrants themselves, and to the host countries (a win-win situation).
This paper showed the ambiguity and the difficulty of the debates raised by the issue of the brain drain. The emigration of high-skilled workers is not a bad thing in itself. But, as other phenomena of the globalization (movements of goods, services and capital) it has to be regulated in a fair way.