In This contention is supported by the judgment of Blackburne J in The effect of this is to render the trustee entirely culpable even in a case where the gross negligence of a beneficiary had contributed significantly to her own loss. Without a mechanism to effect a just allocation of responsibility, this seems to assert considerable hardship on the part of trustees.
However, New Zealand A plea of contributory negligence has been allowed in the context of a trustee's breach of fiduciary duty. Moreover, it has been pointed out that while Blackburne J rejected apportionment in cases of
In this paper we examine whether there is room for the introduction of contributory negligence on the part of claimants into the realm of liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care. The starting point of our analysis is the issue regarding fusion of common law and equity. We distinguish breach of fiduciary duty from breach of duty of care and make certain assumptions before proceeding to identify the relevant distinctions between tort principles and trusts law. We then focus our attention to the fault principle by comparing tortuous negligence to trustees' breach of their duty of care. After taking a closer look at the common law damages and equitable compensation, we observe that the compensatory goals of the two remedies are essentially the same. Based on this remedial congruence, we argue that both should attract the same sort of analysis in determining limitations on the remedies.
Since we are concerned with introducing a tort concept into trusts law, caution is taken with regard to the issue of fusion of common law and equity. While some opine that fusion is of crucial importance in introducing contributory fault into trusts, This is clearly out of the scope of a paper merely concerning the issue of contributory fault. Also, it must be pointed out that common law and equity are still held to be separate to this day. However, given the institutional difference between legal and equitable title in modern trusts,
It would be appropriate to distinguish breach of fiduciary duty from breach of duty of care at this point. This has been described as a "dimly lit area" of law. This observation will be carried on to the next phase of analysis.
In
While a breach of a trustee's duty of care is arguably more concerned with justice between parties, the fiduciary principle is not only concerned with justice between parties, but also to maintain exemplary standards of trust in the public interest. It is also interesting to note that fiduciary duties are different from 'any obligation imposed by tort law', since tort law generally 'does not require people to act for the benefit of others and to ignore their own interests, but to avoid causing "disbenefit" to others'.
As mentioned on the outset, Commonwealth authorities have diverged on the point concerning apportionment of fiduciary liability on the ground of contributory fault. In New Zealand, Sir Cooke P in This was approved by the majority of the Supreme Court of Canada in Although Sir Cooke P's approach in
Due to the close conceptual proximity of liability for a trustee's breach of fiduciary duty and liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care, it is important to dispel arguments that stem from the fiduciary principle before proceeding. Case law rejecting contributory negligence in breach of fiduciary duty has been based primarily on the distinctive features of a trustee's fiduciary duty. Considerable argument is related to the exemplary function of the fiduciary principle. This is the strong policy-based presumption that a trustee should bear the risk of all losses flowing from breach of fiduciary duty. It may be noted that the same may be said for tortuous negligence as well, where there is arguably no similar exemplary function.
The second argument against the introduction of contributory negligence into liability for breach of fiduciary duty is related to the intention element. One must distinguish Given the exemplary function of fiduciary duties, Blackburne J in Again, the same may be said for tortuous negligence. Thus, trustees' breach of their duty of care is in the same position as tortuous negligence in this sense.
It is appropriate to note that this area of law is still in flux and concepts are still being contested. For example, it has been pointed out that the line between conduct amounting to mere negligence and that amounting to breach of fiduciary duty is 'a fine one'. These conclusions are to be assumed for the rest of this paper. We assume that fiduciary duty and a trustee's duty of care are distinct, non-overlapping concepts. When we consider a trustee's breach of her duty of care, we assume that her fiduciary duties, together with the exemplary functions of a trustee's fiduciary duties do not come into play. In other words, for the rest of this essay, we assume that taking account of the beneficiary's fault to reduce trustee liability for her breach of duty of care would
We now consider tort negligence and the trustee's breach of their duty of care (hereinafter 'our breach in question'). It would be appropriate to say a few words on the relationship of tort law and trusts law before moving on. Tort law is can be viewed as a set of protective rules which establish obligations designed to protect interests created by constitutive rules of the law of trusts, whereas trusts law contains both constitutive and protective rules. In this sense, liability for interference of with common law property rights is comparable with the trustee's liability for breach of their duty of care. However, that is not to say that tort law protects equitable property rights, rather, it is to treat our breach in question as an "equitable wrong".
In theory, the tortuous duty of care and the trustee's duty of care are distinct. In determining whether a person's conduct was reasonable in tortuous negligence, the degree of their personal or experience in relation to the risk activity is irrelevant, unless the defendant actively lead the claimant to think that she was more than typically skilled or experienced.
However, despite this resemblance, whether the fault principle of tortuous negligence is applicable in the realm of liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care has been contentious. According to Lord Brown-Wilkinson in If this aspect of trustee liability is fault based, then the trustee should only be liable to the extent of losses property attributable to their fault. 'Primary fault and contributory fault are opposing sides of the fault principle coin; the former is not legitimate unless the latter is acknowledged'. Due to these similarities between the tortuous duty of care and the trustee's duty of care, it is suggested that the same sort of analysis should be adopted in determining appropriate remedies.
However, if trustee liability is strict, then room for introduction of contributory negligence may be a bit tight. Although contributory negligence may be available in certain tortuous strict liability by virtue of legislation, This is especially relevant in the context of bare trusts, since many trustees of bare trusts are nowadays in essence commercial agents.
Although there are considerable similarities may be drawn between tortuous negligence and liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care, it remains to be seen whether the latter is governed by the same fault principle that governs the former. However, in the ensuing discussion about their respective remedies, we will make important distinctions that are decisive on this point. For the time being, we assume that the reasoning in
In this section, we look at common law damages and equitable compensation. It is generally accepted that common law damages in tortuous negligence is to compensate a victim for actionable losses that a tortfeasor has caused her to suffer. Its use has been described as 'unclear' with 'overlapping nomenclature' with 'labels used interchangeably to describe quite different remedies commonly governed by the courts,
For the purpose of clarity without venturing off-topic into the debate concerning equitable compensation Of these five types, only the first two are of interest to us. Substitutive compensation may refer to the money substitute for value required to perfect a failed duty a trustee promised to deliver; whereas reparative compensation may refer to the money required to make good losses occasioned by a trustee's breach of trust, including a trustee's imprudent investment. 'Equitable compensation' is a term that has been said to be used variably to encompass both substitutive and reparative compensation. This has been suggested to be the source of the confusion in terminology. Hence, to remove any ambiguity and confusion in terminology for the rest of this essay, 'equitable compensation' for our purposes of considering liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care will be referring to reparative compensation rather than substitutive compensation.
Bearing this new meaning of equitable compensation in mind, the similarities between common law damages and equitable compensation immediately resonate. Both are clearly calculated to make good a loss sustained by the claimant by reason of the defendant's wrongful act. Even Blackburne J in Hence it is understandable that it has been suggested that in bare trusts, the trustee's duty is not to compensate the beneficiary indirectly by accounting to the trust, but to compensate the beneficiary directly, such that there is no fundamental difference between the trustee's duty to compensate for losses caused by breach of the trustee's duty of care and common law liability to compensate an injured party for negligently caused harm'.
There are considerable objections concerning contributory negligence and contributory fault in relation to the victim and the beneficiary's conduct must be drawn. In tort, contributory negligence consists of failure to take care for one's own interests. However, contributory negligence rests on the assumption that the victim's loss was caused by failure to take steps to protect her own interests, or that she relied unreasonably on a statement made by the tortfeasor.
The policy underlying the defence of contributory negligence is that 'people should take reasonable care for themselves as well as for others'. The victim's responsibility for losses resulting from her reactions to the tort, whether acts or omissions is governed by the doctrine of mitigation and the doctrine of intervening causation, such that the victim is expected to take reasonable care for themselves even if this requires positive steps. While it is unclear whether English courts would accept a duty to mitigate loss on the part of a claimant beneficiary, there are Canadian authorities that have recognized a duty on the part of a claimant beneficiary to mitigate loss caused by a fiduciary breach.
However, continuing the logic in the previous section of this paper, if the remedies for tortuous negligence and for our breach in question are essentially similar in substance, then the same sort of analysis in determining appropriate limitations on the two remedies should be applied. This has already been echoed in an argument elsewhere that remoteness criteria for unintentional breach of trustee's duty of care should be the same as those applied in the tort of negligence. But the principles underlying both systems are the same' Although the contributory negligence statute In particular, a function of contributory negligence in tort law is to act as a mechanism to effect a just allocation of responsibility. It is submitted that this function is directly comparable to that it might serve in the law of trusts. There is already support for apportionment in cases of merely careless breach in the area of bare trusts. However, it is also submitted that our new meaning of equitable compensation dispels these concerns, such that there is room for the introduction of contributory negligence into liability for breach of trustee's duty of care to trusts in general.
Tort-like considerations of contributory negligence should be introduced to trustee liability for breach of their duty of care. A plausible mechanism would be to introduce a rebuttable presumption against apportionment of liability for the careless trustee. Contributory negligence is an objective concept that depends on what the reasonable person would have done in the victim's position. However, tort law allows leniency in applying the test of reasonableness; some people may take less care for their own interests than it requires people to take care for the interests of others. In other words, the defence of contributory fault would still lean towards favouring the beneficiary over the trustee. Only if the trustee could establish gross negligence on the part of the beneficiary that contributed significantly to her own loss, would the trustee be entitled to apportionment. The availability of contributory fault would ease the ethical concern of trustees being liable for losses not attributable to their own carelessness, while maintaining consistency with the fiduciary or moral duties the trustee may be in breach of by virtue of our breach in question. With this form of contributory fault, there should at least be room for the introduction of contributory negligence on the part of claimants into the realm of liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care in this sense.
We highlighted the differences between a trustee's fiduciary duty and a trustee's duty of care and argued that the arguments against introducing contributory negligence into breach of fiduciary duty do not apply to our issue. We have also taken note of the similar positions a trustee's breach of her duty of care and a tortfeasor is in when compared to breach of fiduciary duty. We went on to assume that fiduciary duty and a trustee's duty of care are distinct, non-overlapping concepts in order to support the view that trustee's breach of her duty of care is essentially the same as tortuous negligence, and that liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care is based on the principle of fault. Furthermore, we found considerable similarities between common law damages and equitable compensation and that the compensatory goals of the two remedies are essentially the same. Bearing the wide range of similarities between tortuous negligence and trustees' breach of their duty of care, we argued that the same sort of analysis in determining appropriate limitations on the two remedies should be applied. We also proposed a plausible model for contributory fault in the context of liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care.
Until an appropriate set of facts comes before the House of Lords, the principles that should be applied in determining apportionment of fault will remain unclear. However, in light of the above analysis, it is safe to say that there is room for the introduction of contributory negligence on the part of claimants into the realm of liability of trustees for breach of their duty of care.