The limited liability company has become the flagship of most capitalist economies since its inauguration in the 19 th century. Yet there are times where the limited liability of companies may cause undue hardship on creditors. Consequently, the judiciary may be prepared to relax the doctrine of the separate legal personality of a company in certain circumstances and render shareholders personally liable. This relaxation is more commonly known as "lifting" or "piercing" the "corporate veil".
However, business practices have changed dramatically over the past century. A number of factors, such as globalization and intensified competition, have triggered the emergence of corporate groups. This raises the central issue of this article: whether courts have been able to cope with this commercial development satisfactorily.
We start by briefly introducing fundamental concepts of corporate personality, limited liability and the doctrine of piercing the corporate veil. We then take a look at contemporary problems of corporate group structures before moving on to examine the courts' stance on lifting the corporate veil. By analyzing the underlying policies for the current legal situation, we argue that the current legal situation does not address the perceived problems of corporate groups satisfactorily.
The doctrine of separate personality of a company is fundamental to modern company law. In essence, the corporation is a separate person and its members are not personally liable for its debts. Coupled with the principle of limited liability, the corporate personality effectively renders the limited liability company the best vehicle available for making profits with limited risks. As a result, shareholders "benefit, through limited liability, from a cap of their down-side risk, whereas the chance of up-side gain is unlimited", thus encouraging investment from the public.
However, this doctrine is not without limits. The basic rationale for the combination of corporate personality and limited liability was to generate economic growth in the wake of the industrial revolution. However, this combination has obvious potential for abuse. Consequently, the doctrine of separate personality has been limited by Parliament and the judiciary in certain circumstances. The doctrine of lifting the corporate veil was cemented into modern company law by the celebrated case of Salomon v Salomon
, where the House of Lords in Salomon held that upon incorporation a new and separate artificial entity comes into existence, even in a small private company established and run by an individual human trader.
The world is now quite different since Salomon. An evolution of business structures have occurred through the course of economic development in the twentieth century. Much of the businesses today are now carried out through a group of holding and subsidiary companies rather than a single company. Yet, the principle in Salomon is still significant because it has been extended to cover the more complex scenario of a multinational inter-corporate group enterprise where a controlling "parent" company operates its business through a number of smaller "subsidiaries", even in cases where each individual entity is indistinguishable.
This extension of Salomon, however, is not without controversy. First, the legitimacy of corporate groups operating as a single-economic unit while enjoying separate corporate personality has been questioned. It has been suggested that the courts have confirmed application of Corporate Personality within corporate groups without deep consideration of its consequences. The doctrine of separate corporate personality has clearly been thought to protect shareholders of natural persons, and courts have traditionally dealt with cases concerning shareholders of natural persons. Emergence of new problems created by corporate groups raises new challenges to the traditional orthodoxy.
The second line of debate assumes that protection offered to shareholders of natural persons should also be offered to holding companies and corporate groups, but questions when this protection should be lifted. It has also been alleged that the law has failed to keep pace with the developments in the commercial world. These accusations merit a thorough assessment of the current legal situation regarding lifting the corporate veil of corporate groups. We will focus on this line of the debate in the rest of this article.
A starting point may be examining the issue related to corporate groups. While corporate groups vary in structure, the exploitation of the company law by corporate groups is also open to variation. The classic example is best illustrated in the facts of Adams v Cape Industries Plc
. The case concerned the alleged negligence of Cape Industries plc, a multinational company based in England involved in mining asbestos in South Africa and marketing it worldwide, causing asbestos infection to claimants that either worked or lived in the vicinity of the asbestos mines and mills. Judgment was obtained in the United States but since Cape was not "present" in the United States, the English Court of Appeal declined to recognize and enforce the judgment.
Hence, part of the commercial reality today is that corporate groups are using the principle established in Salomon to their advantage by limiting liability to subsidiary companies. By establishing subsidiary companies in foreign countries to undergo profitable but risky operations, the parent reaps the rewards if the subsidiary turns out to be successful. However, if the subsidiary fails and incurs a hefty liability, then a strict application Salomon would limit liability to the subsidiary and the rest of the corporate group remain unaffected. This results in serious injustice if the subsidiary is severely undercapitalized while undertaking ultra-hazardous operations in developing countries. Clearly, this is a serious issue that deserves further scrutiny.
In general, the law limits liability at trading company level. Although this has been severely criticized, Salomon has been reaffirmed once and again by courts. Narrow grounds for lifting the corporate veil do exist, but judicial reaction has been seen as inconsistent and lacks uniformity. A general observation is that courts are reluctant to lift the corporate veil.
The leading authority for lifting the corporate veil is the leading judgment of Slade L.J. in Adams. Slade L.J. stressed that "the court is not free to disregard the principle of Salomon v A Salomon & Co Ltd merely because it considers that justice so requires". This is so even cases where the subsidiary is heavily undercapitalized, the risks are huge and the tremendous liabilities are incurred. A corporate group is perfectly entitled to structure itself "as to ensure that the legal liability (if any) in respect of particular future activities of the group... will fall on another member of the group rather than the defendant company".
The only grounds where a court may lift the corporate veil were the "exceptional agency" ground and the "faade or sham" ground. While the circumstances for the former to occur are extremely narrow, the latter has generally been recognized as the only possible route for courts to pierce the corporate veil. The difficulty is to know when a company is a "mere faade". The authorities concerning "sham" or "faade" prior to Adams were straightforward 20 th century cases of clearly fraudulent schemes and Slade L.J. expressly declined to give elaborate guidelines on this matter. In Gilford Motor Co v Horne
, the Court of Appeal lifted the corporate veil by allowing an injunction against both the defendant and his newly established company, because the only purpose of the company was to enable the defendant to defeat the terms of his restrictive covenant from his former employers. This was followed in Jones v Lipman
, where the defendant set up a company that received land which the defendant was obliged to transfer in a previously agreed contract. Hence, the corporate veil would only be lifted in circumstances where the corporate structure had been abused, and abuse includes evading a known and existing, or confidently predicted liability.
However, there is little guidance regarding the features that distinguish a company avoiding future liabilities from evading existing liabilities. It has been suggested that some form of impropriety linked to the use of the corporate structure that goes beyond a subjective assessment of what is "just" on any particular set of facts. In Trustor AB v Smallbone and Others
, a managing director of a company transferred funds from the claimant company to a company owned and controlled by the managing director. In his judgment, Sir Andrew Morritt VC held that the court was entitled to pierce the corporate veil and recognise the receipt of the company as that of the individual if the company was used as a device or faade to conceal the true facts thereby avoiding or concealing any liability of those individuals. Evidence of the intentions and motives of the controller of the company is also evidence that the use of the company structure is also evidence that the use of the company structure is a faade or sham. While channelling funds through a company will not be sufficient to prevent the controller of the company from incurring personal liability in equity for knowing receipted of those funds, where the company is deemed to be a faade, dishonestly constructed corporate arrangements designed to conceal both the true nature of assets and the true beneficiary of the exploitation of those assets, and furthermore to minimise the liability of that individual, provides a link between the impropriety and the faade to lift the corporate veil.
As can be seen, it is difficult to derive any specific guidelines from the decisions after Adams. The only safe conclusion is that the boundaries of the faade ground are not certain. However, one should note that the faade ground does not directly address the problems associated with corporate groups apart from recognizing its legitimate use. It merely distinguishes abuse by differentiating evasion of past liabilities or avoiding future obligations. Since most of the cases were settled out of court, there is no legal precedent that settles the issue concerning parental responsibility for the wrongs of subsidiaries apart from Adams. This provides little guidance on the problem of corporate groups.
It is appropriate to keep the entire legal situation in mind. Legislation deals with specific problems that have arisen by a variety of patchwork statutes, leaving ample scope for exploitation from corporate groups. Courts have delivered ad hoc justice through mixed decisions and arguably by "peeping through the corporate veil". Although the problems arising from corporate group structures have not been directly dealt upon, one must ask is this legal situation really dissatisfactory?
The court in Adams answered in the negative, that the allocation of risks and quarantining potential liability within the corporate group is a legitimate use of group structure. Although it has also been suggested that the insistence by Slade L.J. upon the exclusivity of "sham" as the only general basis for piercing the corporate veil is understandable from a practical perspective, it has been suggested that the court in Adams was primarily motivated with the notion of avoiding a "tainted" US award. Furthermore, others may have reservations regarding certain "sharp practices" of corporate groups. This urges one to consider whether Adams is valid from a policy point of view.
The question hinges upon one's view on the extent of protection offered to current "norms" of commercial reality concerning corporate groups. On one hand is the integrity and autonomy of the corporate form established in Salomon; on the other is the public policy to curb the most economically harmful or morally reprehensible abuses of the corporate form by corporate groups. In light of the entire legal situation, the law must strike the right balance between respecting the artificial entity of the company and achieving justice sought for by the claimants.
One argument for upholding the doctrine of corporate personality is that creditors should "look after their own skin". The doctrine is not mandatory and parties to a contract may opt out of it. Potential creditors should obtain guarantee from the parent company before dealing with the subsidiary. However, it is doubtful whether this demand is available to small creditors or involuntary creditors such as victims of tortuous conduct by the subsidiary. Little legislative protection is provided to these claimants. By refusing to pierce the veil in such circumstances, the court in effect bars tort victims just compensation from the parent of an undercapitalized, tortuous subsidiary. This is extrapolated in mass tort cases concerning extreme risks and tremendous harm done. At least in these circumstances court intervention should be justified to lift the corporate veil by reason of public policy to protect the public from extreme hazards.
Another argument for upholding the separate corporate personality is the "asset partitioning" rationale. Although the separation of assets and liabilities is normally considered working against creditors of the subsidiary companies, the same creditors also obtain protection from the creditors of the shareholders of those subsidiary companies. In other words, separate corporate personality is a two-edged sword that also works to the benefit of creditors. While the asset partitioning rationale is certainly valid and worth considering, it is also arguably true that limited liability did not anticipate shareholders to be legal persons in the first place. As mentioned on the outset, the primary rationale was to encourage investment from the public, not encourage investment from companies. It is arguable that a parent company should not be entitled to the same disparity in the risks and rewards as shareholders who are natural persons.
The corporate veil test is clearly not fair. While the legal position treats both types of shareholders, that is parent companies and natural persons, equally by providing the same legal protection, the different nature of the two works to favour corporate groups. The "agency" argument fails because the holding company-subsidiary relationship usually falls short of a full agency relationship. The "single economic unit" argument addresses this commercial reality, but the decision in Adams seems to turn a blind eye to the different nature of shareholders and allows corporate groups to operate as single economic entities while enjoying partitioned liability as separate legal entities, including the practice of "quarantining risks".
Without clear guidance as to when corporate group structures constitute a "mere faade", corporate groups are practically free to operate however they please. The effect of the current position is to allow corporate groups to shift risks to overpowered or involuntary creditors, thereby running serious risk of corporate groups "externalizing" liability in negligence. This runs contrary to recent calls for greater corporate social responsibility and is clearly not desirable.
In sum, the injustice arising from the problem of corporate groups outlined above is not just perceived, but in fact very real. Current legislative is inadequate to cover these foreseeable problems. Courts have been unwilling to curb the apparent exploitation of the principles in Salomon by corporate groups. These problems are more severe when one considers recent trends in commercial reality, namely the increasing variety of corporate structures, the growth of multinational conglomerates and an alleged high level of abuse of corporate structure. Hence, the legal situation is unsatisfactory form a policy point of view, particularly in light of the group structure of many modern businesses.
We have looked at the doctrine and the problems that have arisen with the emergence of corporate groups. Since the current legal situation essentially allows multinationals to shift risk to involuntary creditors, it is doubtful whether the law is valid from a policy point of view. In light of the current legal situation and its inadequacies, the case towards formulating a Law of Corporate Groups strong indeed. Although the new Companies Act 2006 does not deal with this issue, there can only be room for improvement in the future.