Corporate social responsibility has become a widely held buzzword in the business community for good corporate practices. However, it has also been the focus of debate on its very nature and theoretical justification. One of these criticisms is that corporate social responsibility sounds fine in theory but is unworkable in practice.
This article investigates the validity of this claim first by briefly looking at the nature of corporate social responsibility. Then, we undergo an in-depth analysis of the issues related to its implementation from a practical perspective, thereby identifying the limits of the concept and the obstacles to its realization. We conclude with an assessment of the workability of corporate social responsibility and argue that the current situation is rather disappointing.
It is important to have a clear picture of corporate social responsibility in mind at the outset. Unfortunately, the first and most notable feature of corporate social responsibility is the variety of its definitions.
There are at least 25 different conceptual definitions of corporate social responsibility within academic literature. The European Commission defines corporate social responsibility as a concept whereby companies "decide voluntarily to contribute to a better society and a cleaner environment". An alternate description is that corporate social responsibility is concerned with "the relationship between companies and society and in particular, with constraining the adverse impact of corporate activity on individuals and communities as a whole". In other words, while corporate social responsibility is generally about charity and stewardship from companies, there is no real consensus regarding its definition.
It is also important to bear in mind that the notion of corporate social responsibility is an evolving concept. The notion of corporate social responsibility evolved over the 20 th century. The original corporate social responsibility debates took place in the 1930s and were primarily concerned with the responsibilities owed by corporate managers and directors to their shareholders and other groups directly influenced by the corporation. Milton Friedman's famous critique emerged in the 1970s arguing that, on grounds based on economics and morality, there was no place for corporate social responsibility in businesses. It was not until the 1990s did corporate social responsibility become the buzzword of many businesses and become a service providing industry of its own. Hence, it is likely that this trend of evolution of corporate social responsibility as a concept will continue in the 21 st century.
Nevertheless, one has to conceptualize corporate social responsibility as a philosophy for purposes of discussion. Corporate social responsibility is a collective name for many different activities that span a variety of disciplines and professional fields. It is an aggregation of socially responsible behaviours of companies that address social and environmental concerns. The one agreed characteristic about corporate social responsibility is that it is voluntary. As will be seen in the analysis below, this has important ramifications in the implementation of corporate social responsibility.
Corporate social responsibility is also associated with ideas such as corporate philanthropy, corporate citizenship, sustainable development and stakeholder accountability. Interests concerned with corporate social responsibility may range from shareholder's interests to employee's interests to local communities to environmental concerns. In sum, corporate social responsibility is a "fuzzy" concept generally related to "socially good" behaviour of businesses. As will be seen in the following section, these facets of corporate social responsibility is directly related to the assessment of how practical is corporate social responsibility.
As mentioned above, corporate social responsibility is not without its detractors. Many arguments have already been put forwarded by critics, including Friedman's influential essay on economics and morality. In response to these critiques, corporate social responsibility has gradually evolved into various theories such as stakeholder theory and corporate citizenship. In general, the competing themes central to the corporate social responsibility debate are economics (which focuses on corporations) and moral philosophy (which focuses on social responsibilities). Nonetheless, corporate social responsibility has continued to gain importance in managerial practice.
However, the greater, and perhaps more pragmatic, challenge of corporate social responsibility is concerned with its implementation. Corporate social responsibility sounds nice and dandy, but is it workable in practice? This boils down to the focus of this essay and the section that follows provides an in-depth analysis of the issues concerned with its implementation. The issues analyzed below relates to reasons for businesses to adopt corporate social responsibility, the issues related to the mechanics of implementation, the standards of corporate social responsibility, its assessment and its enforcement. As will be seen, there are significant obstacles towards the implementation of corporate social responsibility.
The first question is related to the fact that corporate social responsibility is voluntary. If corporate social responsibility is to be purely voluntary, the obvious concern is why would businesses adopt it? On the face of it, corporate social responsibility seems to run contrary to the fundamental premise on which businesses operate: profit generation. After all, directors are legally bound to act solely for the best interest for the company's shareholders.
A number of reasons have been put forward to establish the "business case" for corporate social responsibility. A primary argument relied on is that "morality pays". This asserts that businesses adopting corporate social responsibility will increase their profit margins by receiving intangible benefits, such as stakeholder commitment, which leads to stakeholder commitment, ultimately leading to corporate success.
However, moral behaviour is neither sufficient nor necessary for corporate success. Moreover, it has been pointed out that most discussion concerning social and financial performance has been misleading to assume that an unequivocal link between these two ends exists. Without a firm understanding between corporate social responsibility and its economic consequences, there is no firm case for businesses to run corporate social responsibility programmes and the businesses that are already running corporate social responsibility programmes are relying on mere speculation.
In other words, there is no firm incentive for businesses to adopt corporate social responsibility at all. Hence, it is doubtful whether corporate social responsibility programmes would be taken seriously.
The second issue concerns engagement of corporate social responsibility. How are businesses going to adopt it? Which corporate social responsibility activities should businesses engage in? How should managers and executives balance the strategic logic of social involvement with other, more tangible strategic investment projects? These are practical considerations that deserve further scrutiny.
We can start by looking at the mechanics of implementing corporate social responsibility. Basic instruments of corporate social responsibility may include values statements, codes of conducts or ethics, social reporting, auditing and certification. While there is no real consensus as to how corporate social responsibility is to be achieved, there has been a proliferation of corporate social responsibility agencies that promises to help businesses incorporate corporate social responsibility policies into their company.
One methodology available is Grayson &amp; Hodges' seven-step model, which includes: identifying triggers, scoping what matters, making the business case, committing to action, integrating and gathering resources, engaging stakeholders, and measuring and reporting. These are described as "diagnostic planning tools... [to] provide a practical guide to help business leaders and understand how to assess the impact of corporate social responsibility on their core business strategy and operations and help them identify and prioritise between subsequent options and resulting business opportunities". Hence, as a methodology, it does seem that corporate social responsibility is as workable as any quality management programme.
However, a widely held observation of the extent of corporate social responsibility adopted by businesses today is superficial rather than substantial. Their corporate social responsibility programmes focus more on elaborate PR schemes rather than substantive issues of corporate social responsibility. Moreover, the ideational neutrality of adopted standards and effectiveness of businesses adopting codes of conduct are questionable. This hypocrisy has lead to accusations of "corporate sidelining reality" that corporations are exploiting the confusion of corporate social responsibility to their advantage and delaying calls for regulation.
Another issue related to practical implementation of corporate social responsibility is the lack of corporate social responsibility related management tools. Businesses utilize financial management tools to make decisions in allocating their resources, such as cash, time and personnel. However, the same tools are rendered obsolete in assessing intangible concepts such as stakeholder interests. Without better analytic tools to formulate corporate social responsibility decisions, managers could only resort to their personal common sense in making decisions. The lack of general principles will be highlighted when managers are faced with competing stakeholder interests.
The voluntariness of corporate social responsibility entails a further issue concerning the extent of corporate social responsibility to be adopted by businesses. Given the confusion and lack of consensus regarding corporate social responsibility, one must doubt whether there is an accepted standard of responsibilities. A number of conceptual issues may be posited. A general example may concern whether managers can substitute involvement in some corporate social responsibilities for lack of involvement in others. Another question may relate to universality and cultural defences: what does corporate social responsibility mean in a non-Western, non-democratic capitalist institutional framework? Although a number of "global" corporate social responsibility instruments have been drafted, these codes are not without objection and their effectiveness are yet to be seen.
The logical continuum is the assessment of corporate social responsibility. If corporate social responsibility is voluntary, businesses are to set up standards for themselves. Thus corporate social responsibility is effectively a self-regulating regime. The accountability of such arrangement is undoubtedly put into question.
While there is debate about the criteria against which corporate social and environmental performance should be assessed, there is little discussion about the underlying ideational and epistemological premise that acceptable behaviour can be itemised, measured and accounted for. Although there are a number of groups supply corporate social responsibility ratings to investors and consumers, the validity and reliability of these ratings may be questionable. Thus, there is real difficulty in quantifying business corporate social responsibility performance and public expectations.
The last issue that entails voluntariness is the lack of enforcement. Enforcement is not within the concept of corporate social responsibility. Since corporate social responsibility is a self-regulating regime, the only enforcement mechanism available is from the market itself. However, the only apparent enforcement against large corporations seems to be the harassment from NGOs and ratings agencies. This adds considerable weight to the criticism of accountability of corporate social responsibility.
As can be seen, there are a number of obstacles that are in the way to implementing corporate social responsibility. To sum up our analysis, businesses have little reason to adopt corporate social responsibility programmes at all. The effectiveness of current implementation methods are yet to be seen. The know-how of implementing corporate social responsibility is arguably insufficient to effectuate corporate social responsibility in businesses. Without a consensus in the standards of corporate social responsibility and effective enforcement mechanism, the accountability of corporate social responsibility as a self-regulatory regime falls into question. Hence, the very features that define corporate social responsibility are also the same that undermines it.
Although corporate social responsibility undoubtedly has a normative appeal, the voluntariness of corporate social responsibility has led to serious accountability issues and the hypocrisy in its current implementation. In light of the above analysis, accusations that corporate social responsibility is unworkable are understandable from a practical perspective. When compounded with other criticisms of corporate social responsibility, the future of corporate social responsibility seems to be cast in a shadow of doubt.
Looking on the bright side, there may be a future for corporate social responsibility. The European Commission has aspirations for corporate social responsibility to contribute to making Europe "the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world, capable of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion". The UK government now has an "ambitious vision" to see corporate social responsibility take root in British businesses and has set out its own approach to corporate social responsibility values. These may be seen as pragmatic attempts to implementing corporate social responsibility. Perhaps in the future, corporate social responsibility may be more workable in practice.