Contemporary English abortion debate has been a tug-of-war between the pro-life camp and the pro-choice camp. For decades neither side of the debate has been able to declare a conclusive victory. Central to the debate are two questions: whether or not abortion should ever be justified in law ('the First Question'); and if answered in the positive, in what circumstances should abortion be permitted ('the Second Question').
Despite the on-going controversy, the English legal position has moved forward by the enactment of the Abortion Act 1967 and the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990. In general, the law allows abortion in specific circumstances, thus answering the First Question in the positive, while pragmatically addressing the Second Question by setting out certain statutory grounds. However, a closer examination of the English abortion law in the context of foetal disability reveals that the current law is fails to distinguish those circumstances satisfactorily.
By drawing the American legal position as a complementary approach, it is contended that a rights-based approach would give a better result in the balancing exercise than the current approach adopted in the UK.
Abortion, in general, raises complex moral, ethical and legal issues. The English debate has been dominated by the question of whether or not abortion should ever be justified in law. Traditionally, the issue is split amongst the pro-life camp and the pro-choice camp.
The pro-life camp tends to emphasize a right to life of the foetus and would claim that abortion should never be justified in law. The pro-lifer argument is that the foetus is a person and terminating pregnancy before its birth is equivalent to murder. Thus, abortion is morally wrong and should not be justified in law.
The pro-choice camp tends to stress a woman's right to choose and would claim that abortion should never be justified in law. Arguments drawn from a woman's right to autonomy, right to privacy and right to equality has been raised as support, such as the influential 'violinist argument' by Judith Jarvis Thomson, which is an argument based on the right to autonomy. In general, pro-choice advocates contend that the rights of the foetus are trumped by the woman's rights, thus allowing abortion.
However, neither side has come up with a conclusive set of arguments to convince the other. On one hand, the pro-life camp has been plagued by questions such as when life begins and English law is clear that the foetus has no legal status until it is born. On the other, the pro-choice camp has disputed over which right is best to emphasize and shows a lack of theoretical consensus. While it would be futile to pursue the extent of the debate to the whole here, it is safe to conclude that the debate has never really ended.
The on-going debate has not impeded the development of English law on abortion. While abortion remains a criminal offence, the law was liberalized through the enactment of the Abortion Act 1967, which was subsequently amended by the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990.
In general, the Abortion Act 1967 allows a woman to have an abortion if it is performed by a registered medical practitioner and two doctors are satisfied that one of the stipulated statutory grounds is met. The statutory grounds are: (a) to avoid 'injury to the physical or mental health of the pregnant woman or any existing children of her family; (b) to 'prevent grave permanent injury to the physical or mental health of the pregnant woman'; (c) to save the life of the pregnant woman; and (d) where there is a substantial risk that if the child were born it would be 'seriously handicapped'.
The law recognizes some interests of the foetus, as advocated by the pro-life groups, partly by retaining the crime of abortion; by allowing abortion in certain circumstances, Parliament accepts the position advocated by the pro-choice groups. Abortion is allowed in specific circumstances, thus answering the First Question in the positive, while the Second Question is pragmatically addressed by setting out each statutory ground for abortion.
Hence, the English legal position has moved forward despite the on-going controversy and appears to have achieved a middle ground between outlawing abortions completely and allowing abortion on demand.
However, the English debate is far from conclusion.
The English legal position has been criticized for its lack of a 'single, coherent, philosophy' that properly considers 'issues of individual rights, the balance between individual rights and public policy, and issues of conflicting rights'. By allowing doctors to consider whether the statutory grounds for abortion are met, the decision is shifted onto the medical profession.
More importantly, the Act fails to distinguish the circumstances where abortion is allowed in a satisfactory manner. While this is illustrated in the section following, Parliament's failure to address the Second Question highlights how difficult it is to distinguish circumstances in which abortion should not be permitted from those in which it should. In other words, the more difficult moral questions have not been satisfactorily addressed.
The circumstances to be considered may range from the circumstances of conception, to the characteristics of the foetus, to the physical or mental conditions of the woman, which then turns on how fine-grain each circumstance is defined. The difficulty is in determining whether abortion should not be permitted from those in which it should. The answer might depend on one's moral values. This allows diverse opinions on each circumstance yet the law could only entertain one answer.
Apart from the notion that abortion should be allowed where a mother's life is in danger, there is little consensus on the circumstances that allow abortion. For example, whether abortion should be allowed after rape is already contentious by some.
The question to be answered, framed in the context of English law, is whether it would be unjust to deny legal protection (from the crime of abortion) in such circumstances. The difficulty in answering this question is best illustrated in the context of disability.
Section 1(1)(d) of the English Act allows abortion on grounds of 'serious disability' if two doctors consider that 'there is a substantial risk that if the child were born it would suffer from such physical or mental abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped'.
The difficult questions posed is threefold: (a) whether abortion on grounds of foetal disability should be allowed; (b) which conditions of disability merit termination; and (c) what are the factors to be taken into account when considering 'seriousness'.
The uncertainties highlighted in the previous section were raised in the case of Jepson v The Chief Constable of West Mercia Police Constabulary
.
The case was a successful application for permission to proceed with judicial review for the police's decision not to investigate doctors who authorized an abortion for bilateral cleft lip and palate at 28 weeks under the disability ground of the Act. Although the issue was left unresolved, the case raises various issues on the legality of an abortion for foetal disability.
The Claimant raised a challenge to abortion on grounds of foetal disability first by claiming 'that the foetus at 24 weeks gestation and greater has a right to life pursuant to Article 2 of the European Convention on Human Rights, which is only subject to the competing Article 2 right of the mother' and 'that section 1(1)(d) of the Abortion Act 1967 is incompatible with Articles 2, 3, 8 and 14 of the European Convention on Human Rights'. There is no case law directly on this point but it has been suggested that it is unlikely for this claim to succeed.
The main thrust of the claim was whether cleft lip and palate constitutes 'serious handicap' within the meaning of section 1(1)(d) of the Abortion Act 1967. Notions of remediability were invoked to support of this claim.
Thirdly, although this was not explicitly contended in the case, an issue raised was whether taking the parents' views into account in considering the definition of 'serious handicap' is consistent with the disability ground of the Abortion Act. While the claim has not been pursued further, the issues raised in the previous section were recognized as issues that will receive judicial attention.
In summary, it has been seen that abortion on grounds of foetal disability is a problematic area which raises difficult moral questions. Aborting a severely disabled foetus as a circumstance on its own is already arguable. What is more difficult is in distinguishing which conditions of disability merit termination.
Determining the factors that should be taken into consideration in allowing an abortion regarding foetal disability further complicates the matter. The Jepson case shows that the court recognizes these difficulties as issues that will receive judicial attention. In other words, a closer examination of English abortion law in the context of foetal disability has revealed that the current law fails to address the more difficult moral issues that arise in the Second Question.
Given the unsatisfactory state of the law and the stalemate in the English abortion debate, is there a way out?
It may be useful to look at the position across the Atlantic.
While the English Act does not provide a 'right to abortion' in any sense, abortion law in the United States is concerned with a pregnant woman's autonomy and is rights-based. Instead of treating abortion as a wrong, the right of abortion is derived from the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment. A woman can exercise her right to abort her foetus (pre-viability) for any reason, unlike the English position where justification is required for abortion.
Since no reasons are required, there is no dispute as to the circumstances where abortion is allowed, such as foetal disability. Rather, regulation is achieved through the recognition of 'important State interests' which are capable of limiting the right of abortion. Hence American cases usually turn on whether a woman's right to abort was subject to illegitimate state interference. Only in states allowing termination after viability on the basis of foetal disability does questions of definition, analogous to the English difficulty in interpreting 'seriousness' in the Abortion Act 1967, arise.
In other words, the American approach treats abortion as a positive right of autonomy. State regulations are valid only if it does not impose a 'substantial obstacle in the path of a woman seeking an abortion before the foetus attains viability'. On the contrary, the English approach treats abortion as a negative liberty. Access to abortion is allowed only if statutory circumstances are met.
It is not contended that the American position should be adopted, but the rights-based approach may be taken as a plausible complementary alternative. Instead of defining circumstances that allow abortion, regulation could alternatively be achieved by stipulating situations where abortion is prohibited. Although this alternative merely phrases the same question the other way round, it would have significant changes on the law.
On one hand, this would give women greater freedom in abortion by removing circumstances where legislation is silent on; on the other, interests of the foetus, in the context of abortion, would be better protected by explicit stipulation. In other words, by adopting this alternative approach Parliament would recognize circumstances where the foetus is better treated as a person than a non-person.
Putting abortion in terms of the rights/interests of the woman and those of the foetus, the issue of distinguishing circumstances in which abortion should not be permitted from those in which it should is essentially a balancing exercise. Between the extremes of banning abortion and allowing it on demand, the extent to which a woman could have access to abortion legally is a matter of degree laid down by Parliament.
The current regime in England, Wales and Scotland fails to give a clear distinction between the circumstances where abortion should be allowed and is in an unsatisfactory state. Although it is unlikely for the UK to adopt the US position, perhaps a move towards a rights based approach would result in a more objective approach to answering the difficult moral questions that arise in distinguishing circumstances in which abortion should not be permitted from those in which it should in the future.