In the recent case of Shamil Bank of Bahrain EC v Beximco Pharmaceuticals Ltd &amp; Ors, the Court of Appeal declined to interpret a contractual choice of law clause as requiring it to determine and apply principles of Shariah or Islamic law by an English court. This statement continues the tradition in this jurisdiction of precluding any system of law that does not derive from the sovereign power of a state to be referred to by English choice of law rules. More specifically, Shariah law does not constitute a choice of law for the purposes of article 3 of the Rome Convention. However, the issue in Shamil Bank of Bahrain EC v Beximco does raise an interesting question: should choice of law rules ever designate non-state norms as applicable law?
In this paper, we first look at the current position in England before moving on to make an in-depth analysis of the issue. This paper identifies a middle-way between outright acceptance and outright rejection of all systems of law that does not derive from the sovereign power of a state. We argue that non-state commercial codifications that are neutral, internationally recognized and capable of being uniformly applied worldwide should be recognized as a possible option for choice of law rules to refer to.
In Shamil Bank of Bahrain EC v Beximco, the governing law clause contained in certain financing agreements provided that "subject to the principles of the glorious Shariah" the agreements would be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of England. The defendants accepted that the sole governing law was English law, but contested that this should not preclude the possibility of the application of the Shariah as legal principles. Potter LJ held that English law was the sole governing law of the contract. There could not be two governing laws in respect of the agreements and according to the Rome Convention, scheduled to the Contracts (Applicable Law) Act 1990, the only choice of the law contemplated and sanctioned is that of a country.
There could be no doubt that the English legal system does not recognize the choice of non-state norms. Article 1(1) of the Rome Convention expressly stipulates that the Convention governs the 'choice between the laws of different countries'. 'Applicable law' is recognized as 'the law of a country' in various articles. In its Green Paper on the Law Applicable to Contractual Obligations, the European Commission, in addressing questions regarding the choice of non-state rules, stated that "[i]n the minds of the authors of the Convention, such a choice does not constitute a choice of law within the meaning of Article 3, which can only be choice of a body of state law: a contract containing such a choice would be governed by the law applicable in the absence of a choice (Article 4), and it would fall to this law to determine the role to be played by the non-state rules chosen by the parties".
However, it must also be noted that although choice of law rules do not recognize non-state norms, there are various mechanisms in place that give effect to such norms. One is the doctrine of incorporation, which allows parties to incorporate specific rules, including those of non-state rules as terms of a contract. However, this only operates where the parties have sufficiently identified the provisions of a foreign law or international code which are apt to be incorporated as terms of the relevant contract. In Shamil Bank of Bahrain EC v Beximco, although it was possible to incorporate provisions of foreign law as terms of a contract, the general reference in those financial agreements to principles of Shariah law did not identify any specific aspects of Shariah law and was insufficient for the doctrine to operate.
Another mechanism is the transformation of non-state norms into laws. English common law incorporated large parts of lex mercatoria into the common law. In this sense, elements of lex mercatoria are law insofar as they cease to be elements of lex mercatoria and become part of the law of the state. Other mechanisms may include transformation of non-state law into facts, transformation of non-state law into subordinated law and recognition of arbitration awards. In other words, while non-state laws are denied status as foreign law, they are nevertheless acknowledged and given effect in alternate mechanisms.
Against this background, we begin our assessment on whether there should be exclusion of the choice of a non-state body.
We start by looking at the principle of 'party autonomy'. The freedom of choice is amply expressed in Article 3(1) of the Rome Convention, allowing parties freedom to select the law that governs their contract. This is a fundamental concept in conflicts of laws. The same could be said in the United States, where the Restatement (Second) of Conflict of Laws also provides for free party choice of law.
However, the principle of party autonomy is not without limitations. Limitations may involve priority of protective laws, connection to a foreign law and substantial relationship to the chosen law. Clearly, refusing contracting parties the right to choose non-state laws to govern their contracts is also an encroachment of their freedom of choice. The legitimacy of such infringement turns on the weight of the justifications for denial. A proper balance should be struck between the two competing principles. Given the importance of the freedom in question, substantial reasons must be given to justify its violation. Only if these justifications could outweigh the importance of the freedom of choice should non-state norms be rejected.
A pragmatic concern for allowing recognition of non-state norms is related to the difficulty in identifying the precise content of non-state norms. One cannot blindly assume that all non-state laws are solid and complete. This is true for certain documents produced by several well established international non-governmental bodies such as the International Institute for the Unification of Private Law (UNIDROIT) and the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL). However, it is doubtful whether other non-state norms apart from codifications, such as the UNIDROIT Principles of International Commercial Contracts (the UNIDROIT Principles), enjoy such certainty and predictability. The principles of the Sharia were described as 'controversial religious principles' and doubted whether they were principles of law by the judge of first instance in Shamil Bank of Bahrain EC v Beximco. In its Explanatory Memorandum for its Proposal for a Regulation on the Law Applicable to Contractual obligations, the European Commission expressly excluded the lex mercatoria (and any 'private codifications not adequately recognized by the international community') from its proposal to introduce the UNIDROIT Principles and the European Principles of Contract Law as possible choices for its choice of law rules regime. This was because the lex mercatoria is 'not precise enough'. Following this line of thought, determining which non-state norms would be 'sufficiently precise' may be a difficult and arbitrary exercise. As can be seen, there are considerable practical issues to be solved before recognizing all non-state norms as applicable law.
Another correlated reason for refusing application of non-state laws is the infringement of public policy. Concern for protecting parties with weaker bargaining power is expressed in various provisions concerning consumer contracts and employee protection. Although mandatory rules or protective laws would nevertheless apply by virtue of state legislation, allowing application of non-state norms may nevertheless run the risk of parties being bound without their express consent. This has been illustrated by the pervasive role clearing-house rules plays in the field of bank deposits and collections according to Article 4 of the Uniform Commercial Code. This adds weight to the justification of encroaching the party's freedom of choice.
A reason for recognition of non-state norms based on the theory of the sources of law may be put forward. Proponents for non-state norms accuse the state monopolizing the law-making process. Recognizing non-state norms as applicable law would undermine the state's authoritative position as the monopoly on law-making. Denying non-state normative orders status as law strengthens its position, whereas doing the opposite would weaken it. By acknowledging non-state norms and denying them the status of law at the same time, the state 'immunizes' itself against non-state norms. According to the theory of global legal pluralism, the legal orders created by non-state communities should be recognized the same way as state legal orders. However, it has been pointed out that a state cannot recognize non-state law as law and at the same time maintain the same concept for itself, because '[t]he normative order designated by the choice of law rules is always a reflection of the normative encompassing the choice of law rules'. Not only would it change the nature of 'applicable law' under choice of law rules, such recognition would also undermine the distinction between state and non-state communities themselves. Hence, this legal pluralism argument loses strength after careful consideration.
A main reason for the skepticism in choice of law rules is centered on the fact that non-state norms are privately made, 'with all the attendant consequences. It is recognized that non-state norms such as the lex mercatoria is a form of law with 'serious democratic deficits'. Although it is recognized that soft legal regimes are praised for its peculiar responsiveness and effectiveness to actual needs, the lack democratic legitimacy may be a considerable obstacle in the path of recognizing non-state norms in choice of law rules. However, it has also been pointed out that democratic recognition and high-minded moral values may not be so significant in the context of international business. Hence we can see that there might be room for introducing non-state norms in international commercial contracts. Certainly, this is the view taken by the European Commission in Proposal for a Regulation on the Law Applicable to Contractual obligations.
There may be a case for choice of law rules to fulfilling the parties' will to choose a system of law that does not derive from the sovereign power of a state that governs their commercial contract. As pointed out above, non-state laws are usually already acknowledged through indirect means and refusing the application of non-state laws may at least achieve some certainty in the law. Although there are suggestions that the need for legal certainty excludes the operation of a more dynamic notion of the law, it is arguable whether domestic laws connected with greater legal formalism provide such certainty itself. Moreover, it is very common for parties of a commercial contract to stipulate for neutral law and neutral jurisdiction in order to avoid the application of the law of the state in any dispute. It has always been an aim for the choice of law process is to promote uniformity of result regardless of where the claim is litigated. Even if explicit recognition would not necessarily give non-state norms a greater practical importance than the mechanisms already in place, allowing parties to choose a commercial code that is neutral, internationally recognized and capable of being uniformly applied worldwide (such as the UNIDROIT Principles) would nevertheless avoid unnecessary conflicts and boost the impact of the parties' will.
As we have seen, it is fair to that although the current position in England and Europe excludes the choice of a non-state body of law, non-state laws are given effect through various alternate mechanisms. Our balancing exercise was weighed against this background and we found that although there are certain obstacles that are in the path of outright acceptance, the justifications for infringement of the freedom of choice are considerably diminished when we consider the arguments in the business context. We identified obstacles such as difficulty in identifying the precise content of non-state norms and the possibility of infringing public policy. Although legal pluralism argument loses strength after close scrutiny, democratic legitimacy is not required in the commercial context. However, allowing parties to choose a commercial code that is neutral, internationally recognized and capable of being uniformly applied worldwide (such as the UNIDROIT Principles) would nevertheless avoid unnecessary conflicts and boost the impact of the parties' will. This view is supported by the change of attitudes in Europe and America. Hence, neutral and internationally recognized non-state commercial codifications that are capable of being uniformly applied worldwide should be available as an option in choice of law rules.