I have chosen to write my essay on the right to silence as I have found it one of the most engaging and curious topics throughout the module. Prior to having studied the topic, it was my understanding that the traditional interpretation of the right to silence remained intact, however in reality it seems that this is far from the truth. In my opinion this seems to be an exorbitant erosion of one of the fundamental principles and protections of English law and thus this is my motivation for choosing it as the topic for my essay. The exact title of the essay arises from the fact that my opinion on the merits of the right to silence are very straightforward, that I believe in its importance and merits within the legal system. As such the essay title and thus essay, focuses both on whether the right to silence should exist and significantly whether it still does within the modern legal system.
The starting point of my research was as always my lecture notes and textbook. Traditionally this is often the point from which I begin an essay as it gives me the basic areas with which to cover and points me in the direction of further areas of study. My second point of research is along the same lines, that I like to consult another textbook, simply to consolidate my earlier research and again to point me in the direction of further ideas. For this purpose I looked at Roberts and Zuckerman's Criminal Evidence as it's a book I've consulted previously during ALS and other modules and is very good analytical text.
From here my research switches primarily to journal articles. I found these online through Westlaw and Lexis Nexis and used these to provide more specific research on the right to silence debate and the impact of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994. I also used Westlaw and Lexis Nexis to find the relevant cases and legislation.
Finally I conducted two interviews; firstly with a local defence solicitor  who works for  and secondly with a prosecutor from the Warwickshire CPS . I chose to leave the interviews until last as I wanted to be certain of my subject material and specific questions I could ask, rather than simply asking general questions which would be of little benefit. I conducted the interviews by telephone and created a list of questions I wanted answering prior to calling. I asked questions as to the use and implementation of the right to silence and I specifically asked whether they were in favour of the right to silence and whether they believed it still existed.