In this study a range of polymethacrylates were synthesised via ATRP using a phenol bromoisobutyryl initiator and a variety of alkylpyridylmethanimine ligands around a copper(I)bromide catalyst. The effects of varying the length of the alkyl chain on the ligand and the type of monomer on the polymerisation was studied. Polymerisations proceeded with approximately first order kinetics, giving a narrow PDI in most cases. Butyl methacrylate polymerised at a greater rate than methy methacrylate, and shorter alkyl chains on the ligand gave a greater polymerisation rate.
Atom Transfer Radical Polymerisation (ATRP) is a recent and popular method of controlling radical polymerisation. The use of copper(I) halides in conjunction with alkyl halide initiators to mediate such a polymerisation produces narrow polydispersity indices and allows good control of polymer structure under typical polymerisation conditions
Schiff bases such The use of phenolic ester-based alkyl halide initiators in such a system has also been demonstrated
We investigate the effect of different pyridylmethanimine ligands on the polymerisation of methyl,
All manipulations were carried out without the aid of Schlenk apparatus. Molecular weight distributions were measured using size exclusion chromatography (SEC) calibrated with MMA standards. Corrections were made for BMA polymers. Conversions were measured by
Ligands were synthesised in resonable yields (>65%).
Synthesis of the homopolymers proceeded with approximately first order kinetics propducing polymers with a narrow PDI. The rate of BMA polymerisation was greater than that of MMA as expected.
The longer alkyl chain on the ligand retarded the polymerisation rate. The butyl group provides the transition metal complex with a greater affinity for the non-polar solvent. The propyl group tends to make the complex more soluble in the polar monomers, this possibly leading to a higher local concentration of monomer, aiding the reaction.
The attempted synthesis of phenyl bromoisobutyrate yielded two products. The 1,5-dibromo anhydride was produced by coupling of bromoisobutyryl bromide. Dropwise addition of the bromide to the phenol during the initiator synthesis resulted in a high local concentration of the bromide and encouraged anyhdride formation.
This had several consequences for the polymerisation step. GPC at 2hrs showed the polymerisation mixture to contain not only the phenol initiated PBMA but a polymer of roughly double its molecular weight. This is believed to be the result of the dibromo anhydride acting as a difunctional initiator. GPC at 4hrs showed a reduction in concentration of this polymer as did GPC of the final polymer product. Most of the anhydride initiated polymer was hydrolised between 2 and 4hrs in the reaction mixture and almost all the remainder was hydrolysed during the work-up. This produced a mixture of phenol and carboxylic acid
The theoretical Mn at 100% conversion for the BMA reaction was 9252g.mol This compares approximately with the corrected final polymer GPC result of 10049 g.mol
Two copolymers were synthesised. Both started with polymerisation of MMA. In reaction C, BzMA was added after 2 hours, and in reaction D after 4 hours.
Homopolymerisation proceeded until the second monomer was added. Statistical co-polymerisation then occurred. Unfortunately, for reaction D, as no NMR of the reaction mixture was run at 22hours, and integration of the product spectra was unreliable, we cannot determine the final conversion values. The raw conversion data for reaction C points to a copolymer rich in MMA with little BzMA incorporated. The overall BzMA conversion appeared to decrease between 2 and 4 hours. We do not understand why this is the case.
Both MMA polymers had a high Tg and were isolated as off-white powders. The MMA/BzMA copolymer in reaction C had a low Tg, and an appearance and texture similar to that of Marmite. The BMA polymer had a lower Tg (below room temperature), and was clearly capable of flow. It had an appearance and texture equivalent to Plasticine. These properties were expected. The butyl groups in PBMA reduce cohesion between the polymer chains, giving a low Tg. The methyl groups in PMMA have less of an effect on Tg. The BMA polymer had a green colour, due to the presence of the copper catalyst.
We have shown that it is possible with very little prior knowledge to polymerise methacrylates via atom transfer polymerisation using easily synthesised ligands and initiators. This study has also highlighted the need to follow such reactions more closely by frequent NMR and GPC anaylsis to support any conclusions made on reaction kinetics.