In the conflict-ridden world of the new millennium, Private Military Companies are a reality. Despite their obvious engagement in global conflicts, the international legal community has been unable (or unwilling) to establish their legal status and their operating parameters.
This brief will provide the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) with the necessary background information and suggested revisions for the concrete defining and regulation of Private Military Companies. It includes two sections: the first section will discuss the nature of Private Military Companies and why their current status reflects a deficiency in International Humanitarian Law (IHL). This deficiency will be illustrated with a brief case study of Bosnia-Herzegovina and an examination of the short-comings of the current international law and IHL that attempts to govern the conduct and status of Private Military Companies and their employees. The second section contains possible revisions for the ICRC to debate and discuss at the Second International Conference on Privatization of War.
PMCs represent a vast industry which cannot be governed by IHL alone. A number of countries have tried to create domestic regulations that could govern the PMCs incorporated in their national boundaries. While governing PMC conduct as business is certainly one way of controlling their conduct, it does not satisfy the separate issues that IHL presents. The main issues that must be review and answered by IHL are the following: the legal status of PMC employees in all of their roles, and how IHL will govern a non-state party such as a PMC.
There is no doubt that the status of PMC employees will have to be reviewed and established in the near future. With the characteristics of new war rapidly changing conflict, and with it the type of "soldiers" needed to fight it, PMCs are going to continue to increase in their participation in global conflicts. For the protection of the PMC employee, of military members worldwide and of civilians in conflict zones, the ICRC and the global community must fit PMCs into the jigsaw puzzle of IHL - no matter how awkward and incompatible PMCs may seem.