This treatise has been prepared on behalf of Action Against the Suffering of the South (AASS), a civil society network, for submission to the organisers of the next World Social Forum (WSF), for their consideration during the WSF agenda-setting process.
The treatise outlines four related propositions that AASS recommends be placed on the agenda for the next WSF, for the purpose of encouraging the participants (whether alternative globalisation movements (AGMs), civil society organisations (CSOs) or otherwise) to adopt a platform of action that AASS considers will lead to greater effectiveness in the advancement of global justice, as evidenced through equitable improvements in the quality of life for people living in the deprived communities of the South and the North. Whilst the influences on civil society activism, including political, economic and social factors, cannot be compartmentalised, the primary focus of each of the propositions is on the relationship between law and civil society activism.
Prior to detailing the propositions, it is useful to consider briefly the context of, and motivation for, the treatise; namely, the present uncertainty concerning the promise of the WSF's slogan "Another World Is Possible". This uncertainty is apparent in the recurring line of criticism that suggests that the WSF is chaotic, disorganised and lacks a coherent vision, with only a common enemy, namely hegemonic neoliberalist-led globalisation(s), to bind the myriad disparate participants of the WSF, rather than a clear platform of action from which to address the social inequalities and injustice that exist throughout the world. Beck notes that the global justice or anti-globalisation movement is "probably the most active component of global civil society at the moment. Yet its voices do not translate into concrete policies or generalised public concern."
In response to such criticism, it has been suggested that the specific WSF events themselves "should not be seen as the answer to the challenges of our time; [but] should be seen as a valuable part of the answer(s) with a very distinctive contribution. Other sites for action, for campaigning, for taking decisions are necessary for the global progressive movement." In this regard, whilst it is a generally accepted assertion that the WSF events represent a significant development in political imaginings and practice, less settled is the question of whether such specific events have the capacity to transform effectively into an ongoing process, being a successful translation from theory to practice, that can fulfill the key aspiration of the WSF, as represented in its slogan.
Accordingly, the propositions have been selected with the purpose of facilitating actual widespread change throughout the world, thereby presenting a credible alternative to neoliberal-led globalisations and increasing the emanicipatory potential of law.
The foundational proposition is conceptually-oriented, intended to clarify vision for AGMs and CSOs that work for the advancement of the quality of life in deprived communities. This proposition suggests a reframing of the concept of 'law', which may be applied by any of the WSF participants, regardless of their particular thematic focuses or geographic locations, to engage with law in a globalising world, informed by a concern for social justice and human development.
The concept of 'law' is generally presented and understood as apolitical, benign and relatively unchanging. However, various commentators have highlighted the narrowness of such an interpretation, through historical explorations of legal and political processes. Research has indicated, among other things: the imperialism of international law, as demonstrated through the politics of recognition which created an ongoing project of colonisation and an international law constituted by unequal violence; the changing social reality in developing countries, and the corresponding expansion of the reach of international law, for example as a result of the challenge put forward by the New International Economic Order; the embracing by international institutions of a neo-liberal agenda, which is geared towards promoting and realising the interests of an "emerging transnational capitalist class in the international system to the disadvantage of subaltern classes in the first and third worlds". Thus it becomes apparent that the concept of law is in fact not unproblematic. Enquiry into the origins of the present legal order, its driving agenda and the identity of its advocates demonstrate a dominant political ideology manifested in textual, institutional and other realms.
Further, a central element to the dominant understanding of law is the assumed coinciding of social and state boundaries, making the state the defining feature of the world legal order, and consequently limiting the application of law to a national/international framework. However, in today's world, the state is transcended (although not lost as a significant actor) in many areas of political, economic and social relations where interests, identities, aspirations and languages of normative understandings derive from non-state sources. Given that many of the issues key to global justice concerns (from human rights discourses to cross-border economic relations, from global security policies to environmental consciousness, from globally connected financial and regulatory bodies to transnational anti-systemic movements) are now influenced less and less by hegemonic discourses and control mechanisms of statist law, it appears that state sovereignty stands challenged as the foundational principle of legal imagination, as it proves difficult if not impossible to attempt to challenge transnational issues using a state-centred discourse.
Once the concept of law is recognised as a political (rather than benign and unchanging) concept not limited solely to the national/international duality, it becomes possible to embrace and deploy the legal discourse for particular purposes. Whilst at the present time the law predominantly manifests, through institutions and process, in line with the interests of the hegemonic globalisation(s), its emanicipatory potential is also apparent in relation to the third world and communities of suffering which can take positive action to reclaim the legal discourse. In addition to resistance and activism within law, it becomes possible to imagine resistance to the current conception of law, as well as space for alternative conceptions of law. If 'law' itself is a malleable concept and can be viewed as a "discursive terrain", it can be re-thought as a more powerful tool for communities of suffering.
Various analytical frameworks and theories have sought to advance global justice through such resistance, each with contributions and limitations. Of particular relevance to the reconceived notion of 'law', Hardt and Negri's 'multitude' conception imagines an alternative global order, to be manifested in part through a project of re-thinking the mainstream political form of democracy in a global world. Among other things, this concept emphasises the creation of a "multitude of singularities" through collaborative social interactions and questions what the multitude can become, as opposed to simply focusing on what it is today. Further, by advocating a project of understanding global political order through the idea of Empire, the 'collective biopolitical body' of multitude is arguably more reflective of the complexity of a world order that, in an increasingly globalised world, extends beyond the state-centred legal understanding.
The second, practically-oriented, proposition outlines AASS's recommended approach for AGMs and CSOs in relation to law and civil society activism, namely the adoption of a peoples' law approach.
As noted in Proposition 1 above, the 'multitude' conception imagines an alternative global order, to be manifested through a political project of absolute democracy. An 'absolute democracy' conceives a re-appropriation of the common (namely, the means of production, and free access to and control over knowledge, information, communication and affects) by the multitude that is "the singularities that cooperate in social, biopolitical production" and that is "created in collaborative social interactions".
Whilst Hardt and Negri note that "law has always been a privileged domain for recognising and establishing control over the common" and discuss the 'legal theory of the common' in some detail, the movement from theory to practice is not specified. In this regard, AASS proposes a peoples' law approach as a means of reclaiming a framework that allows for a common participation in the management of goods and services, such as telecommunications, public transportation, energy systems, education and so on, that have been increasingly privatised or controlled by the state in the 'public interest'.
A peoples' law perspective facilitates the re-appropriation of 'law' primarily through the recognition of the 'crime of silence' and a re-claiming (by subaltern, less powerful singularities) of judgment, authorship, control and action in relation to specific violations as well as the complex global interactions, processes and institutions of the present hegemonic world order. Further, it focuses on the responsibility, power and direct space for re-claiming truth, of each individual, which can be focused towards shared goals (representing 'a multitude of singularities').
The starting point or declarative function of a peoples' tribunal organised by AGMs or CSOs is the non-acceptance of precepts or myths of the modern international legal system (for example, the notion that everything is determined by the market). In addition to the declarative function, the key contradictions and problems in relation to the specific issue as well as the related wider context can be examined through the 'deliberative function', sites of appropriate intervention in the world legal order identified locally, transnationally or otherwise through the 'mandating function'.
A peoples' law perspective is not limited thematically or geographically; therefore its value for WSF participants lies in its capacity to extend to any area of inquiry or focus, at any level of society. Previous peoples' law tribunals and other peoples' law forms and initiatives have been held in relation to, among other subjects, the war on Iraq, industrial hazards and human rights, the right to food and the rule of law in Asia, and the environment and human rights.
Whilst individual WSF participants may seek to apply a peoples' law perspective to the specific areas of focus of the particular organisation or movement, common goals could also be pursued through the adoption of such a perspective to challenge global issues that are of interest to multiple AGMs and CSOs. Identifying areas of intervention can stimulate/accelerate vertical and horizontal linkages between the various movements, increasing solidarity and synergies in relation to any common projects and increasing the effectiveness of a translation of movement energy into juridical and political strategic planning and action.
For example, a peoples' law approach could be applied in many ways by multiple WSF participants to challenge the nature, role and power of transnational corporations (TNCs) in the global economy. From such an approach may come specification of areas of intervention such as: the re-naming of 'normal' TNC activities as violations through narratives from communities of suffering and stated recognition of desire for alternatives; deeper understandings of the source and use of power by TNCs generally as well as recognition of the capacity of TNCs to inflict violations on the third world; and proposed strategies to monitor/influence TNCs and the world legal order generally. The latter may include resistance within law, further re-framing of the idea of law itself and/or resistance outside the law, as appropriate. It may also include steps such as the establishment of regional forums to monitor violations, non-legal action and/or strategies to establish alternative practices and concentrate challenges to the institutions, texts, mechanisms of, and sociological and legal conceptions underpinning, hegemonic globalisation and the actions of TNCs.
The third proposition is another practically-oriented recommendation that focuses on the strategies and methods that may assist in making the work of AGMs and CSOs more effective.
AASS recommends that the participants of the WSF make effective and considered use of technology (particularly the Internet given that its characteristics are conducive to both local and transnational relations in a globalised world) to aid in their legal strategies and in accompanying political and social mobilisation in relation to issues of injustice. Technology as a tool is amenable for use by both global capital and neoliberalism, and social movements. Much as the rapid spread and declining costs of technology have aided the proliferation of neoliberalism-dominated capitalism, WSF participants can use or re-appropriate technological advances to attain greater democracy and further shared aspirations of the multitude.
The facilitation of rapid interaction and information exchange helps to foster horizontal relations within and between organisations, a creation of the 'common' or 'multitude', and therefore lends support to Hardt and Negri's suggestion that you need a network to defeat a network. The Internet in particular offers a platform through which multiple singularities can voice their opinions against violations and collaborate in shared goals; such interaction can be viewed as a 'swarm intelligence' with collective intelligence emerging from productive communication and cooperation of such a diverse multiplicity.
For marginalised groups traditionally excluded from the mainstream media, the Internet is a crucial resource to express and transmit ostracised ideas and identities. Further, in circumstances where WSF participants lack support in their local contexts or concentrate on issues that cross geographical boundaries, multigroup and multisite coordination (that continues from and builds on the solidarity experienced at WSF events) has often proven crucial to successful legal change.
The recognition of 'global sectors' of legal issues whose primary relevance is of a transnational rather than national type (such as environmental, global security and economic governance issues) encourages the use of the Internet by locally based groups to link in with counterparts worldwide rather than being constrained within often unsympathetic state borders, a key advantage of AGMs and CSOs over traditional state-based political parties.
For example, the Zapatista use of communication and mobilisation strategies in powerful ways to effect local changes without taking state-based power exemplifies an increasing postmodernist use of the global tools claims by neoliberalism-dominated globalisation and provides a good illustration of how struggles with both local and global dimensions can be brought to global attention and then also affect other local struggles.
However, it is essential for WSF participants to recognise that the "internet's potential to foster democratic relations and effective strategies in civil society depends on the consciousness with which advocates adopt, share, and deploy the technology." A common criticism of the use of the Internet is its uneven diffusion and use across the globe, with a marked North/South divide. Further, the "transmission of unverified information multiplies the possibilities of miscommunication, with potentially damaging results." For example, in China, an official (but ultimately untruthful) government campaign undermined earlier information disseminated by mobile phones regarding the SARS outbreak, because SMS was perceived to be a medium of lower credibility and there was no other source of information.
Technology such as the Internet that is facilitative to transnational encounters can be used at all stages of the various manifestations of a peoples' law approach, whether to mobilise networks of singularities to whom the particular issue is relevant, to transmit sources of information as 'evidence' in the re-claiming of law, or to assist in taking action in the identified areas of intervention (for example, to mobilise applicable AGMS, CSOs, NGOs or individuals to monitor and report on specific ongoing violations by international law against communities of suffering). Whilst such technology cannot replace real time encounters, its benefits should be considered and put into effect to further the aim of global justice.
As illustrated by the brief overview of some of the key contributions and limitations of the Internet, it is essential to undertake any such use in a considered manner, and in conjunction with a carefully constructed legal and political strategy.
The fourth proposition focuses on legal skills that ought to be developed among AGMs and CSOs that work against the effects of neoliberalism-dominated globalisation. In this regard, AASS recommends that WSF participants synergise legal activities across societal levels, from the community to the global.
An exploitation of opportunities is possible due to an increasingly plural legal landscape, made visible by the time-space compression characteristic of the globalisation process. It is important to recognise that the various levels of society do not exist separately but are all interconnected, and that "the category of the transnational runs counter to (or cuts across) all concepts of social order". Accordingly, whilst whether law is an instrument or an impediment depends on the level of intervention selected, successful action at one or more levels will have an impact on the system as a whole. What is appropriate is likely to depend on the responsiveness of skills, strategies and tactics to the politico-economic contexts in which the quest for emancipation may be located, based on a social construction that seeks to understand the connections between the local, the national and the global
As part of the mandating function of the peoples' law approach, all options and sites ought to be considered to identify areas of practical intervention in the hegemonic world order and to act to create an alternative. The environment is one area of the law where activism has made the most significant contribution, with multiple societal levels targeted concurrently, along with re-conceived subjects of law (for example in relation to intergenerational rights).
A number of possible intervention areas have already been mentioned above. Whilst we can conceive of a resistance to the current idea of 'law' itself, legal action involving resistance within law can also result in societal change. Arguably, such action can strengthen the current order as it legitimates it as a source of authority and judgment. However, as Hardt and Negri recognise the multitude conception is nascent and not yet a viable political project, it would be narrowminded to refrain from working concurrently within and against the 'law' at this time. Further, resistance within the law through 'bottom-up', grassroots activism, as advocated by the subaltern cosmopolitan theorists, is often useful for revealing the inconsistencies and injustices of the dominant discourses in neoliberal globalisation and national/international law. In this regard, the "sociology of emergence" contributes to the WSF goal by allowing the identification of "emerging qualities and entities at a moment in which they can easily be discarded ... as idealistic, hopeless, insignificant, or past-oriented."
A peoples' law approach further expands this conception of law by allowing us to re-think the spaces for the 'doing' of law. Literature and poetry is used by Galeano among others to re-tell historical narratives from the subaltern perspective, revealing human rights violations. At past WSF events, "through the various informal sessions ... in workshops, art, theatre, processions and moot courts, the various grassroots movements were able to complete the picture of the nature and intensity of the unjust global system". In this way, the expansion of the concept of law can be manifested through the imagining and use of innovative texts and forms of truth-telling.
The initial strength of the WSF came from its declarative statement that 'Another World is Possible'. As Hardt and Negri note, we make and re-make the common we share every day. Accordingly, the task now is for each individual to become actively conscious of the myriad interconnections, processes and acts of creation constituting the world order on all its societal levels, and to collaborate in various forms and innovative ways to utilise individual and collective power to stop re-living yesterday's injustices and, instead, create a more compassionate 'common'.