In recent decades, international attention has increasingly focused on global environmental issues, as the world seeks to address concerns such as climate change, the loss of biological diversity, deforestation and soil depletion, unsustainable energy use, and contaminated water supplies.
The concern of the international community in relation to problematic environmental issues has manifested in major world conferences, including ones in Stockholm in 1972
Despite the adoption of these instruments, the health of the planet has continued to decline, with an inevitable impact upon the health of its human inhabitants. These circumstances, in turn, have contributed to, or exacerbated, the major development challenges of the 21 However, the effects of these problems are not experienced uniformly around the world. Substantial quantitative and qualitative evidence has demonstrated that women, particularly in developing countries, disproportionately experience the impacts of environmental degradation and its related human development issues.
In light of this current reality, this essay examines the extent to which the environmental sustainability statement of the Millennium Declaration The purpose of this enquiry is to contribute to the task of bridging the gap between the intentions of apparently gender-neutral international environmental instruments and the realities of women's daily lives, through the application of human rights law.
The first part of this essay will outline the environmental sustainability goal of the Millennium Declaration and will consider the extent to which it is framed within a gendered approach to development. The second part of this essay will illustrate how the adoption of a women-focused human rights-based approach can widen and strengthen the understanding of the relationship between women and environmental sustainability. Finally, this essay will consider the potential for applying this understanding as a foundation for the mainstreaming of women's human rights into country reporting in relation to the environmental sustainability goal of the Millennium Declaration.
Whilst MDG 7 is arguably broadly framed within a gendered perspective, when considered in the context of the MDGs generally, a review of recent country-specific reporting in relation to this application of this goal has revealed that there is a current lack of gender focus in relation to this goal.
The UNDP has stated that the MDGs "are intended to catalyse a collective commitment to social transformation." I suggest that the women-focused human rights based approach to environmental sustainability, as outlined above, has the potential to assist women's rights advocates to direct this social transformation to meet the specific needs of women in different countries.
Such an approach could, through the application of human rights law, effectively contribute to the task of bridging the gap between the intentions of MDG 7, as an apparently gender-neutral international environmental instrument, and the realities of women's daily lives in order to effect practical change and achieve global justice.