This report investigates the drag force on a cylinder using the method of pressure distribution around a cylinder.
A circular cylinder was immersed in the fluid air, using a large low speed wind-tunnel, in the School Of Engineering's laboratory. Three different scenarios simulating turbulent as well as laminar flow, were investigated, and the factors which affected the drag on the cylinder were investigated. The importance of the Reynolds Number of the fluid flow was also determined.
The report also investigates how to reduce the effect of drag on a body, and how the process of streamlining occurs and its dependence on the magnitude of the Reynolds Number of the fluid flow.
It is shown that the drag force was found to be dependent on the flow pattern of the fluid and hence the velocity and density of the fluid the body was immersed in, and the dimensions and shape of the body itself.
It was concluded that the drag forces depend on the flow structure in the wake formed at the rear of the cylinder. The wider the wake is, the higher the drag forces are. The wake is formed when the flow around the cylinder separates, and the point at which this separates is determined by the Reynolds's number of the flow, which is due to a combination of the size of the body and the speed of flow. It was also deduced, that in order to reduce drag forces on a body, its shape should be designed to be as streamlined as possible, because streamlining reduces the size of the wake, hence reducing the drag force.
The total drag on any body consists of skin friction drag and form drag. The skin friction drag is a result of the viscous forces acting on the body while the form drag is due to the unbalanced pressure forces on the body. The sum of the two is called total or profile drag. There are several methods that can be used to determine the drag forces, including prediction of drag from wake measurements and from the pressure distribution around a cylinder. The procedure used during this investigation was to measure the pressure distribution around a cylinder.
Flow over a cylinder is a primary fluid mechanics problem of practical importance. The flow field over the cylinder is symmetric at low values of Reynolds number. As the Reynolds number increases, flow begins to separate behind the cylinder causing vortex shedding which is an unsteady phenomenon. The basic theory of fluid flow around a smooth cylinder dates back to nineteenth century hydrodynamics.
The theory presented here predicts the velocity and pressure distribution about the circumference of a circular cylinder immersed in a fluid stream. The same theory predicts the lift and drag forces on the cylinder and can be applied to airfoils in modern aircraft and turbo-machinery applications.
In the basic hydrodynamic theory for this experiment, the fluid is assumed to be inviscid and incompressible. The flow which is at a large distance from the immersed body is assumed to be uniform. The flow is also assumed to be irrotational. When the fluid encounters a smooth surface it is assumed to slip tangentially, owing without friction or separation; the fluid neither penetrates the surface nor leaves a gap. This condition is sufficient to yield a unique solution to the governing flow equations.
This boundary condition differs from the more realistic "no slip" condition applied to viscous flows.
In this experiment, the total pressure at various locations along the surface of a cylinder placed in a wind tunnel stream is measured
Using values obtained during the experiment, the Reynolds number of the flows is calculated. By calculating the Reynolds Number of the flows, the boundary layer conditions of the flow can be determined. i.e.( whether the flow is turbulent or laminar)
From the experimental data gathered, it can be concluded that when a blunt object like a cylinder is immersed in a fluid, the magnitude of the drag forces due to the flow, depends on a number of factors.
Firstly, the drag force depends on the Reynolds number of the fluid. The larger the Reynolds number of the flow, the more turbulent the flow is. However, contrary to expectations, the higher the Reynolds number, the lower the coefficient of drag. At low Reynolds number flow, (Re&lt; 1), the drag is a function of upstream velocity. At moderate Reynolds number (10 3&lt;Re&lt;10 5) flows the drag coefficient tends to decrease slightly with Reynolds number. However at high Reynolds numbers (10 5&lt;Re&lt;10 6) there is a sudden decrease in the drag force. This is due to the fact that a turbulent boundary layer, can travel farther along the surface into the adverse pressure gradient on the rear portion of the cylinder before separation occurs .This results in a smaller wake and hence a smaller pressure drag.
Due to the fact that the drag force is dependent on the Reynolds number of the flow, it could be deduced that it is therefore dependent on a combination of the size of the object and the speed and density of the fluid flow.
To reduce drag forces on an object, the flow must be made to separate as late as possible. This can be done by redesigning the object into a shape that is more streamlined. It should be noted however that there are limitations to streamlining. At low Reynolds number flows, streamlining can actually increase in the areas on which shear forces act.
.