Since the late 1970s, with the adoption of neo-liberal economic policies by US and UK, the world economy entirely shifted its direction. Practices such as free trade and deregulation policies became so widespread that they came to be known as "The Washington Consensus". Even the end of History, with the final triumph of Capitalism, was heralded.
Hedge Funds, as will see below, are not in any way the product of neo-liberalism. They were, at least in their most recent form, much fostered by some of its facets, such as deregulation and liberalisation of capital flows, which were much aided by the coming of the Internet.
But globalisation is not without its drawbacks. At this point, a parallel with taxation may be helpful, for at least some of the challenges Hedge Funds present are similar to those faced by regulators as to tax shopping before the enactment of transfer pricing rules - in that the dilemmas our issue presents can never be efficiently tackled solely from the perspective of a single country, even though regulation is intrinsically a sovereign governmental activity, not easily made compatible with a global strategy. In addition, the weighing of interest by government authorities in regulating hedge funds is far more convoluted than in taxation - where, at least theoretically, most problems could be solved by delegating all powers to a global authority who had powers apportion public revenue amongst states in much the same way a central government does with sub-national entities, so as to attain to the objective of fiscal neutrality as to investment allocation decisions.
Conversely, not only do financial regulators of different countries compete against one another for the scarce liquidity that few economic agents apart from hedge funds can provide, they can do so only if the regulations they enact are neither so loose that they fail to protect against crisis, nor so draconian as to prevent maximisation of returns and discourage funds from doing business within their jurisdiction.
Moreover, unlike taxation, those Highly Leveraged Financial Institutions (HLIs) can only deliver nearly-stratospheric yields if they are allowed to exploit to the fullest, inter alia, discrepancies in time and is space that are entailed by the pursuit of diverse national economic policies, in a practice known as arbitrage in the jargon of the financial markets. To our imaginary Earth Revenue, tax havens would simply be banned. Conversely, hedge funds cannot do without them - as most their most common corporate structures rely on a tax-haven based parent company so as to benefit from lower disclosure requirements and tax rates.
If taxation is the antithesis of globalisation - in that it depends on what divides countries - national sovereign powers _, instead of what unites them, hedge funds can only blossom in a globalised world such as ours.
Moreover, financial authorities, unlike their tax counterparts, have little incentive to act in coordination while profit is being made, but have all incentive to join one another in action as systemic crises arise.
Tax have as a condition rationality, for public revenue is for tax authorities what profits are to an entrepreneur, but the former are entirely contingent upon the latter. If each tax authority elected to tax all resources available, they would drain off all incentive of private players to make money. Besides, as the opportunities of making profit are limited in the national level, firms and individuals often go abroad. If countries cannot strike a bargain as between themselves, double taxation would remove all incentive from overseas activities. Therefore, countries have much incentive to negotiate alongside lines previously known to all in the form of the Model Conventions. Conversely, Hedge Funds need diversity to flourish by exploiting differences in currency and interest policies.
As to Hedge Funds, is the reverse: in the event all countries adopted the same economic policies in all respects, there would be short of opportunities. HFs would never flourish under a Fiscal Leviathan, but would be in serious jeopardy under Hobbesian anarchy.
National authorities the world wide must, therefore, strike a very delicate balance between their wealth acquisition and their conduct regulation practices, their need to combine occasional collaboration with their overseas counterparts without dismissing the competitive aspects of the interaction between inside and outside the limits of their territory, within and beyond the limits of their sovereignty. In this respect, as we will be analysing, US and UK authorities seem to have taken different stances in their approaches to hedge funds, with the latter being much laxer then former, with seemingly better results - at least up to now.
In fact, devising an ideal strategy, either municipal or global, for regulating hedge funds is no easy task, but it does give us much food for thought on new challenges of law and regulation of securities and financial markets and possible strategies that may be developed to tackle them, as this is time when long-established distinctions, such as private and public, hard law v. soft law, all blur, and the view of the state as a harmonious whole is no longer tenable, but a new supra-state is not yet born.
We shall now examine how hedge funds were created.
The primary meaning of "hedge" seems in straight opposition to the high degree of risk commonly associated with hedge funds - at least after the disastrous crises triggered by hedge funds Long Term Capital Management (LGCM) and Amaranth - when the former was bailed out by the market, but not the latter. In many dictionaries, the first definitions of this world commonly have the sense of "protection".
A purely technical meaning is given by Black's Law Dictionary:
In fact, the original rationale underlying hedge funds, as devised as early as in 1949 by the first manager of a fund of this sort, Alfred Winslow Jones, was precisely to protect against the volatility of the market. He achieved this by borrowing money at low fixed interest rates in order to borrow various types of securities from brokers in different transactions, betting (with grounds on sophisticated market analysis techniques such as stochastics) on the future plummeting of their value. As this plunge in price materialised, the fund would repay loan and return the devalued shares, amassing in the process the variation in price - relying, throughout, on performance fees for its managers.
Borrowing moneys to purchase stock of a company while expecting to repay with profit arising from future trade of same stock is known as "leverage" in the parlance of the financial market, while borrowing stock from brokers in order to derive gain from betting on expected fluctuations of its value called a "short selling".
Nevertheless, short sales are not in any way the only transaction hedge funds engage in. In their pursuit of extremely high returns, they engage in various types of transactions in several different markets, amongst which we might list:
Credit Derivatives, such as collateralised debt obligations (CDO) and Credit Default Swaps (CDS), and diverse variations and repackages thereof;
Energy and Commodity Derivatives (crucial because higher returns are usually associated with higher risks, and few things can be more volatile than nature);
Credit default swaps;
Carry trade transactions, which uses leverage to post high returns by exploiting correlated risks in different markets, such as American treasure bond and e yen exchange rate as to the US dollar (while expecting that interest rates in both countries remain the same).
New species of hedge funds emerged, such as Funds of Funds - who try to lure more risk-averse or retail investors into the industry - and Vulture Funds (who trade, with huge discounts, bonds of heavily indebted poor countries, and tend to specialize in similar papers much below investment grade, such as distressed debt and junk bonds);
It seems to us that the expression "regulation" in the title of this essay should be given a broad meaning if it is to be given a proper answer. Therefore, while analyzing whether a particular country is in position of curbing threats of financial crises, an overall view of the applicable law thereto will be required, instead of a quick look at current measures of the specialized regulatory agency, for ultimately a country will need the full force of its whole legal system if it is to sort out this crises, and even that may not suffice - for systemic crises triggered by HFs may assume gargantuan proportions requesting a global response by gathering regulators all over the world, all to act in a ad hoc basis in a very much impromptu way, responding to circumstances as they present themselves. Anyway, before we give a definitive answer, we should have an overall view the tools that the UK legal system possesses to carve out a solution.
In the UK, the chief regulatory agency as to securities is the Financial Services Authority (FSA), as is the Securities Exchange Commission (SEC) in the US, the Bank of England performing pretty much the same role of the Federal Reserve as the local central bank. Prone to a British tradition of self-regulation of the markets, the FSA is perhaps less rigid than the SEC, which is constantly involved in litigation with investors in judicial proceedings. The FSA refrains from regulating hedge funds directly, as most of these have their central management and control offshore, therefore outside the reach of its powers - whose exercise abroad cannot be required for other countries as it would amount to a denial of sovereignty thereto. Nevertheless, Hedge Funds normally keep permanent establishments in the cities where most of their prospective clients are located, mainly New York and London, therefore within full reach of local laws and regulations.
US stance is in stark contrast with UK's in that, thanks to doctrines such as the effects theory, as well as blatantly extraterritorial statutes such as the FCPA, ATCA, RICO, and worldwide tax liability, an expression whose construction is entirely in the discretion of the Magistrate applying the law, who will ponder interests while considering the circumstances. Moreover, the crude wording of statutes such as the Patriot Act provides them with various opportunities to assert its jurisdiction to traditional hedge fund locations.
In contrast, UK, even before being bound by EU laws, had always fare more modest long-arm statutes, and not much more than one big exception to extraterritorial rules _ worldwide asset freezing orders, once known as Mareva injunctions.
It should be borne in mind, however, that much of what amounts to national regulations in finance are not in fact the monopoly of a single country. Countries have to comply with a great deal of soft law, such as Basel Rules, which most of them enact internally.
As it admitted in official papers of the FSA, notwithstanding the fact that there are now roughly US$500bn assets under HF management globally (ibid, page 7, item 2.1.), there is no regulation specifically targeted on their marketing and selling within the United Kingdom - whose main city, London, is one of the two largest markets for hedge fund in the world.
Chiefly statutes imposing on HF are the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (FSMA) and various FSA regulations implementing legal rules, the Companies Act 1985, the Open-Ended Investment Companies Regulations 2001.
In UK, offshore-based HFs typically hires local manager who establishes a limited company or a limited partnership to cater for clients. As in most jurisdictions, he needs authorisation of the local regulator, the Financial Services Authority (FSA), prior to start operating through a unregulated collective investment scheme pursuant to article 51(1)(a) of the FSMA) - and, more specifically, by way of species of this genus named an "open-ended investment company", provided for in Section 236 of FSMA and regulated in detail by Statutory Instrument 2001 No. 1228 - The Open-Ended Investment Companies Regulations 2001. These investment companies manage property on behalf of a corporation having as its purpose the investment of its funds with the aim of spreading investment risk; and extend to its members the proceeds of such management of funds by or on behalf of that body.
Besides a manager established in the UK a hedge fund controlled by a parent based offshore will not be able to carry its activities here without qualifying in the UK as an authorised person pursuant to a specific authorisation following fulfillment of certain conditions, or else he or she will fall in the general prohibition rule of Section 19 of the aforementioned statute.
Discussion Paper 16, Hedge funds and the FSA (op. cit.), pages 14-19 propounds various ways whereby UK investors may invest with hedge funds.
Advertisement may be made to Individuals or firms classified as market counterparties or intermediate customers under 5 COB 3.11.2 R, Annex 5, a "Category 7 person" who can purchase unregulated collective investment schemes. These are the target of hedge fund, amounting to sophisticated or qualified investors.
Another exception is private customers upgraded by regulated firms to the status of intermediate customers under rule COB 4.1.9 R. - in any way a much common alternative, perhaps because this would preclude investors from joining the compensation arrangements.
In addition, if the intermediary is approached by customer, he will be enabled to provide counsel by means of a one-off communication under article 15 of the Unregulated CIS Order. Moreover, under COB 3.11.2 R, Annex 5, explanatory notes 2 and 3., an authorised firm may entered into a Customer Agreement under Rule COB.8 and give counsel pending due diligence.
They can also invest under rule 5.5.1 R of the Compensation Sourcebook in a listed company, namely a Fund of Funds. This option has the advantage of diluting further the risk. As a drawback, it pushes complex HF's techniques further into retail.
The local Hedge Fund manager will then enter into an Approval for particular arrangement under section 59 of the FSMA with an approved person. Controlled functions are certain key positions within authorised firms, such as occupied by persons in (a) governing positions, (b) with significant managerial positions or (c) exercising activities required for by the Act or in customer functions.
Clearly, nothing prevents a resident in the UK or British citizens living in any other country from investing online on an overseas hedge fund; in that event, however, they could not benefit from FSA protection.
However, they may instead elect to be labeled an intermediate customer by an authorised firm under rule in which case this firm in question has to produce evidence of their the required expertise - not a very likely event.
From the very beginning it might have been tempting to state that not only UK's, but all national financial regulations inadequate to protect as to financial crisis, for the very simple reason that regulators are limited in their action to the limits of their territory and slow in their bureaucratic habits, whilst hedge funds are hectic and global. Besides, it might be contended that much of British "unregulation" is a conscious policy, as the FSA is in fact striking a bargain with funds by allowing them a larger margin of freedom than the US so that it can reap the benefits of their profit maximization techniques.
On the other hand, it is clear that, although the FSA does abide by certain virtually universal standards financial market regulation, an absolute uniformity of rules is in any way desirable, as might be the case as to taxation, for it would dry off various sources of liquidity for the global economy. In the present state, though, there is not much the UK can do on its own - except, perhaps, lobby for the development of a new global financial architecture whilst acknowledging for the differences between countries, and assigning them different functions by allowing them to enact alternative standards.
In Westphalia, the Great Powers gathered an decided the Switzerland, which had not sent any representatives, should remain neutral. Surprisingly enough, not only it still is and is likely to remain as such, as it also has never had its neutrality violated. Perhaps the time for a new Westphalia has come.