The impact of depreciation in real exchange on trade balance has been a long standing debate in policy circles. Proponents of the international monetarist approach argue that real devaluation of currency raises the price of traded good relative to non-traded goods leading to fewer imports while, Proponents of the absorption approach such as (Alexander 1952) argue that "devaluation may change terms of trade, increase production, and switch production from foreign to domestic goods, thus improving the trade balance" (Bahmani-Oskooee 1984). Channels through which devaluation can negatively affect the trade balance are discussed in (Katseli 1983).
Empirical evidence is mixed: (Bahmani-Oskooee 1989) finds the long-term effect of devaluation to be negative in the case of India, Greece, and Korea; and positive in the case of Thailand. The U.S. trade balance deteriorated in 1972 after a devaluation of the dollar in 1971. (Upadgyaya, Dhakal 1997) find that though devaluation improved trade balance for Colombia, Mexico and Thailand, the effect was statistically significant only for Mexico. For Cyprus, Greece and Morocco, devaluation had a statistically significant negative effect on trade balance. (Himarios Jan 1989), in his extensive study, finds a positive effect of devaluation on trade balance in over 80% of the cases studied. He also finds a J-curve
(Krueger 1983) explains short-term deterioration in trade balance as being caused by domination of current account by goods already in transit, existing contracts and the like. (Junz, Rodolf 1973) attribute lagged improved of trade balance in response to devaluation of real exchange rate to five factors - Their empirical evidence supports lags of up to five years.
This study focuses on India. India's closed economy approach precipitated a macroeconomic crisis in 1991 which led a paradigm shift in macro-policies. Pre-1991, India followed a largely socialist approach involving restrictions on industry, international trade, currency movements, financial and banking sector and private enterprise. Growth in the 1980s was fuelled largely by expansionary fiscal policies resulting in a balance of payments crisis in 1991.
Following the crisis, India undertook a complete overhaul of its macroeconomic policies along more liberal and capitalist lines. The economy was opened up, freer trade was allowed, the over-valued exchange rate was allowed to depreciate both in nominal and real terms, policies to improve public finance were implemented, and fetters to the operation of private enterprise were slowly removed. In short, India's economy faced a radically different set of policies which led to improved economic performance - increased GDP growth rate to over 6%, increased capital formation, higher savings, etc. As a consequence of the change in policies,
In this paper, we shall focus on the long-run relationship between trade and real exchange rate and proceed as follows:
Section II will present the econometric model and data description.
Section III contains the econometric procedures carried out, summary of results, explanation of the process and econometric interpretation of the results were relevant.
Section IV presents the econometric results of Section III in a cohesive fashion and links them to the economic theory discussed in Section I.
Section V discusses the limitations and possible extensions of the model
Section VI - conclusion
In econometric modelling, the ideas in (Bahmani-Oskooee 1984) are followed without the monetary flavour of their model. Further, a quadratic trend and a dummy for potential structural break are included in our model to arrive at the following long-run relationships:
where Our sample includes 155 quarterly observations from 1968Q1 to 2006Q3. The explanatory variables, collected from
Using the above data, real trade balance [BAL] and real exchange rate [REER] were computed as follows:
Our long-run equilibrium relationship from Engle-Granger (EG) and the Dynamic General-to-Specific (G-S) methods is as follows:
The focus of this paper is on the impact of real exchange rate devaluation on trade balance. There is a difference of 3.37 in the coefficient of REER between the two approaches. The coefficients of the trend variables also differ in magnitude. Even though the difference in magnitude exists, it must be kept in mind that they are small in comparison to empirical changes observable in the variables - REER, T, T2 - and do not have a qualitatively negative impact on our study.
Having considered the magnitudes, it is crucial that both methods of arriving at the long-run equilibrium give us the same signs on each variable. This is true of our long-run equilibrium estimates.
Thus, using both approaches, we conclude that an increase in REER causes an increase in BAL (=X-M). This implies that a real depreciation in exchange rate, in the long-run, improves real trade balance in India. This long-run relationship is consistent with a large number of empirical studies on the subject (discussed in Section I)
At each stage of estimation, we detected ARCH (Autoregressive Conditional Heteroscedasticity) effects. Owing to methodological limitations, we could not specify the model to take into account these effects. Furthermore, OLS may no longer be the optimal estimator in the presence of ARCH effects when compared with non-linear estimators such as the maximum likelihood estimator. Further work on the model developed should take ARCH into account.
Though we get economically sensible relationships from both EGM and dynamic General-to-Specific models, we have different values for the intercept and co-efficients of real exchange rate and linear time trend.
Furthermore, owing to constraints on the length of the project, we have focussed only on the long-run equilibrium. It would be interesting exercise to model the short-term dynamics and test for the presence of a 'J-curve'.
A structural break was expected in the model around 1990-91 when India underwent a macroeconomic crisis. Though the dummy used in the model to capture this crisis (LIB) was rejected as insignificant on the basis of valid statistical criterion
We find, in the case of India, that devaluation improves trade balance. Our results contradict those of (Bahmani-Oskooee 1984) who finds that real devaluation worsens the trade balance for India in the long-run. This conflict might be due to the face that we have used co-integration technique for non-stationary variables while (Bahmani-Oskooee 1984), being an old study, makes no use cointegration.
The results of this study lend themselves to policy prescriptions suggesting devaluation as a measure to improve trade balance. One must, however, approach the result with caution. Even though devaluation might improve the trade balance, it is important for a developing country like India to analyse its trade baskets and the impact devaluation would have on it. Such an analysis is important before devaluation is used as a policy tool since it could have negative long-run effects on growth if it adversely affects basic industrial inputs and causes other perverse distortions in the basic input-output matrix. Therefore, a detailed study of the components of the basket of traded goods is recommended if devaluation is pursued as a policy tool.