What a person is or can be, and does or can do is essentially a function of human well being, within which the factor of indisputable importance would be health. As Nobel Laureate Amartya Sen argues that the "capability to function" is what really matters for a poor or non poor person, drawing on whom the United Nations 1994 Human Development Report asserts the purpose of development as being able to create an environment in which all people can expand their capabilities, and opportunities can be enlarged for both current and future generations. This explains why countries with high levels of income but poor standards of health and education have been referred to as cases of "growth without development".
Unprecedented advances in human capital have taken place in the last half-century, in both developed and developing countries. The purpose of this paper is to study the relationship between health and economic development through a cross-national empirical analysis by estimating the determinants of health and emphasising on the impact of income and education on the state of health. However the paper is not successful in finding a reverse causality for both these relationships, though studies do show that healthier people earn higher wages due to productivity differences thereby increasing utility by increasing income and raising the return to the economy. Ambiguity with regard to its causal relation with education still holds in reality.
In section 2 the paper reviews and discusses plausible findings of prominent economists in this area. Section 3 presents the methodology undertaken for the study, the econometric techniques used for estimating the model and also describes the data. Section 4 provides the empirical results, its analysis and implications. In section 5 the paper concludes with summary of the results, extensions to further study along with suggestions for government policy making.
The study of health has been of immense economic, political and social importance. The World Health Organisation defines health as "a state of complete physical, mental and social well being and not merely the absence of disease and infirmity". Health has both intrinsic (as a source of well being) and instrumental value (affects economic growth). It increases worker productivity through improved nutrition. Several empirical studies account for this relationship.
Three of the eight millennium development goals of the United Nations stress on health, namely a reduction in child mortality by two thirds, improving maternal health by three quarters and halting HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases, all by the year 2015. Several indicators have been used to determine health in prior studies. The World Health Organisation (2003) drew attention to the social indicators of health like unemployment, stress, social exclusion, work atmosphere, addiction, early life conditions and so on. Rogers and Wofford (1989) examine factors influencing life expectancy in 95 less developed countries and find it has a strong correlation with the percentage of population in agriculture followed by literacy and safe water. Urbanisation however was found to be less influential.
R. Scott Frey and Caroline Field (2004) used macro social change theories to explain variations in infant mortality rates across countries and found female education, debt dependence and economic disarticulation to play a significant role, whereas factors like industrialisation and state strength did not have very sharp effects. Strauss, Gertler, Rehman and Fox (1993) investigate the socioeconomic determinants of adult ill health across Bangladesh, Jamaica, Malaysia and the United States and find strong effects of education and to and extent per capita household expenditure, they also find considerable life cycle effects causing gender differentials in reporting health problems, with women reporting problems at an earlier age.
Tulijapurkar and Boe (1998) have examined the impact of several factors like education, gender, marital status, race and ethnicity on health; they have also studied the development of mortality and found mortality rates to be declining over time and since life expectancy is negatively correlated with mortality, it would be found to be increasing. Parsons (1982) showed through a probit model that factors like mortality rate, age, prior unemployment experience, and social security benefit and local welfare are negatively related with labour force participation which is positively related with hourly wage rate. Few other studies which could be mentioned are those on life expectancy by Carnes,al. (1996); Finch and Kirkwood (2000); Manton, Stallard, and Tolley (1991), Olshanskyal. (2001).
J. Strauss and D. Thomas (1998) followed Grossman (1972) and defined the health production function as:
Where health H depends on a vector of health inputs N; labour supply L; socio economic characteristics like gender A; family background B' including parental health and local health infrastructure; the disease environment D; and unobservables Of all these health is decreasing only in labour supply as greater work would require greater energy. In another study they found that taller men earn more money in Brazil even after controlling for important determinants like education and experience. They conclude that "the balance of evidence points to a positive effect of elevated nutrient intakes on wages, at least among those who are malnourished". Strauss (1986) found a strong positive impact of better nutrition on farm productivity in Sierra Leone using the agricultural production function and average caloric intake per adult in rural households. There are several studies suggesting the indirect effect of health in increasing productivity of the labour force for instance Harvey Leibenstein (1957), Mushkin (1962) and Sahn and Alderman (1988).
Several empirical studies have been undertaken to determine the close relationship between health and education in economic development. A longer life raises the return to investments in education in several ways while greater education capital raises returns to investment in health. However this is more common sense knowledge than is proven by some literature. Behrman (1996) argues that associations do not necessarily indicate causality, he emphasises on the role of unobservables depending on the choices made by individuals and their families such as parental care and guidance. He incorporates variables like health, gender, pupil teacher ratios, parental education among others and concludes that the effects may be understated or overstated implying an downward or upward bias owing to correlation with the dominant unobserved factor.
Pollitt et.al. (1989) found contradictory results for the impact of iron deficiency on children's school performance in India and Indonesia where there were significant positive effects and in Thailand where the results were contradictory. Jamison (1986) found a positive correlation between height for age and school performance in China. Similarly, Moock and Leslie (1986) have found height for age to be a robust indicator of school enrolment. Analyses by Colclough (1982), Psacharopoulos (1994), World Bank (1993), and the United Nations Development Programme (1990) are based on studies with a wide range of results, some of which indicate little or no effects. Not only do developing countries have lower levels of health the nature and incidence of diseases are different and cause greater damage as has been found by the World Bank (1993); Dean Jamisonal. (1993); Pinstrup Andersonal. (1993).
The plethora of work undertaken in the area of health and economic development speaks for its critical importance in the world today. However, the advancement has only been recent, until the last quarter of the century (it was the returns to education on which much greater amount of work was done under human capital). Nonetheless, the fact remains that a healthy population is a prerequisite for successful economic development, and the interrelationships therein are increasingly gaining special interest.
Following the examination of prior empirical work in the previous section, both institutional and fundamental variables are incorporated in the model to test first the determinants of health, including income, education and other factors, and then briefly discuss its causal relation with education and economic growth by using it as an explanatory variable. Cross-country regression models for the world are constructed and the estimation method applied is Ordinary Least Squares (OLS). As there are several equations estimated with different sets of independent variables, the basic multiple regression model used could be represented by the form:
where y is the dependent variable,  The definitions of variables used in the analysis are provided in table 1.
The popular indices used for measuring health under nutrition based efficiency wage theory are per capita caloric intake, body mass index and so on. However for cross country analysis, there are two kinds of data which are frequently used, life expectancy and mortality rate. Life expectancy has wider coverage (adult mortality rates give the probability of dying between ages of 15 and 60) and thus is more appropriate and shall be used in this analysis (as a dependent variable for the first set of regressions and then as a dependent variable for the second and third regressions). To study the causal relation, average GDP per capita growth rate (in case of economic growth) and the average literacy rate (in case of education) are used as dependent variables.
The data has primarily been obtained from World Development Indicators, the World Bank database. Few of the variables for which data was missing (HIV prevalence rates, immunisation rates, rates for access to improved water and sanitation, and literacy rates) were obtained from the United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD); World Health Organisation (WHO); and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) databases. All data was accessible through the Economic and Social Data Service International website. Although the databases contained data for over 200 countries (including both developing and developed countries) after adjustments for missing observations, the sample size reduced considerably.
The regressions are based on data averaging over 10 years from 1995 to 2004. It is extremely costly and time consuming to obtain social indicators, which explains their scarcity. Some of the indicators are collected only once in every couple of years, also due to the fact that these do not change much within a year. Thus taking averages reduces measurement error at the same time enables one to get maximum data.
The presence of heteroskedasticity is tested using the pure form White Test for Heteroskedasticity with cross terms, wherever possible. If the null for no heteroskedasticity (homoskedasticity) is rejected at the 10% level of significance, heteroskedasticity is a problem (which would give unbiased and consistent, but inefficient estimators i.e. OLS is no longer the Best Linear Unbiased Estimator as variance is biased, and does not remain valid for constructing confidence intervals and t-statistics) and the White's Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors and covariances (which are robust) are used as a remedial measure (WLS i.e. GLS estimators for correcting heteroskedasticity may also be used when the variance is correctly specified).
Specification errors may arise due to inclusion of irrelevant variables (leading to inefficiency), omission of important ones (leading to bias and inconsistency), using proxies leading to errors of measurement bias, or using the wrong functional form. To test for specification error or more specifically the correct functional form, the Ramsey's RESET test is used. If the computed F-Statistic is significant at the 5% level, the model has the incorrect functional form and has been mis-specified. However its drawback is that it provides no real direction to proceed if the model is rejected. Other data problems like missing data (information missing on key variables for several units in the sample leading to reduction in sample size) and the presence of outliers of influential observations (observation making a large difference on the estimation, are also encountered.
To test for adequacy, the normality assumption for the disturbance term u is tested using the Jarque-Bera (JB) test for normality which tests the joint hypothesis of the skewness and kurtosis coefficients (for the skewness and kurtosis of the OLS residuals) being equal to 0 and 3 respectively. If the p value of the JB statistic is sufficiently high and the hypothesis is not rejected, the residuals are normally distributed. Ideally the JB statistic should be used for large sample sizes.
To test how good the fitted model is, besides using the above mentioned tests, certain basic criteria are used. Whether the signs of the estimated coefficients are in accordance with prior expectations; whether the relationship is statistically significant (using t and F test statistics, also the Wald test when required) and the explanatory power of the model (using R Before the interpretation of these results the statistical tests that need to be performed, on the estimated OLS and its residuals, their reasons and implications are summarized in the table 2 below.
The E-views5 econometrics software has been used to perform the appropriate tests. All detailed test results are provided in the appendix. The summarised results and empirical implications are given in the following section.
The empirical analysis in this paper suggests that health conditions for a sample of both developed and developing countries, are explained primarily by the level of income of a country, its educational attainment, health inputs such as safe drinking water, the number of physicians, immunisation rates, health expenditure and the deadly human immunodeficiency virus(HIV). The model showing the causal relation of health with economic growth is quite erroneous and only goes to provide limiting reliance on the cross-sectional work, at the same time it emphasises the need for improving the quality of data and reduce the missing observations, which would solve a lot of problems. In a nutshell data constraints do cripple the analysis severely. The final model does resemble earlier findings where the relation between health and education holds one way or has shown conflicting results for different countries. Another drawback is the inability to control for unobserved variables which bias the estimates. Instruments for these need to be chosen very carefully so as not to create a bias. Extensions to this study could firstly include the use of better data in correcting the drawbacks of the model. Also a country or region specific analysis especially for developing nations would be worthwhile.
A point of mention is that all these variables are even more important for developing countries where the basic levels of health and education are yet to be attained and thus even necessary provisions for a minimal level of subsistence like daily food consumption is directly influenced by the level of income. Also the income distribution in these countries show highly skewed patterns with the top 20% of the population receiving 5 to 10 times the income of the bottom 40%. Literacy rates remain strikingly low at 45% among the least developed countries and infant mortality rates run as high as 10 times those in developed nations. Life expectancy in 1998 still averaged only 48 years in the least developed nations compared to 63 years for other developing countries and 75 years for developed countries. In Asia and Africa over 60% of the population barely met minimum caloric requirements necessary to maintain adequate health. For the year 2001 certain human deprivation indices show that almost a billion people in poor countries were without access to safe drinking water, 766 million did not have access to health services and 2.4 billion lived without sanitation facilities. In 1995, the number of physicians per 100,000 people averaged only 4.4 in least developed countries compared to 217 in developed countries. 90% of the people inflicted with HIV in the world, live in LDCs. By the year 2010 life expectancy in Namibia for instance, is expected to fall from 70.1 years without AIDS to 38.9 years with AIDS. This is only a brief insight to the myriad of problems which need to be tackled in the world today.
It is true that cross sectional data may over or underestimate true causal effects. Moreover prior studies based on past data may show different effects due to different incentives, shocks that might have hit the economy at the time and new market developments and reforms that must have come about making it slightly less comparable. However, there are better studies to suggest to the policy makers the grave importance of improving health standards for economic development. The relation between health and economic development can create either a vicious or a virtuous cycle. There is a debate over whether or not the government should subsidise health and education, however everyone should get an equal go at life at least at the subsistence level in their initial years so that they can translate it into long term productivity gains. The provision of credit for microenterprises is an important poverty alleviation strategy where the credit can contribute to improvement in the nutrition of the poor. Other policy options are providing cash transfers to poor families, family clinic visits, other nutritional and health benefit in kind and so on. Another very important aspect is the dissemination of information and creating awareness among the population especially in rural areas of developing countries which are plagued with myriad social problems.
However the picture is not all bleak, greater proportion of the government budgets are being devoted towards human capital, there is a trend towards international convergence in measures of health and education, with unprecedented advances having taken place in the last half of the century. Gross school enrolment rates, teacher pupil ratios, life expectancy have all shown increases which are statistically significant. Improvements have been faster in developing countries, though the gap with developed countries still remains large.