George Moore experienced many problems with the circulating libraries and publishers when seeking to publish his novel Some of his earlier works such as I would like to discuss why I feel it would also be interesting to compare Esther with Hardy's heroine Tess (
George Moore (1852-1933) was the son of an Irish landowner and racehorse breeder, and with little early education, he was hardly literate at 16 years old. After his father died he went to study in Paris and during his time in France he was influenced greatly by the young artists and writers of the time. He was particularly influenced by the social realist novelists, such as Zola and Balzac, who were interested in the idea of 'telling the truth' As a novelist, Moore saw his role as writing "contemporary history, an exact and complete reproduction of social surroundings of the age we live in". I am going to write about how we worry servants" When considering why the novel was so shocking, it is important to consider the context of the Victorian period that Moore was writing in. Samuel Johnson had proclaimed a century before "for vice is necessary to be shown, should always disgust" Chastity was the "cardinal value" Yet in On all accounts the main subject of Moore's novel is shocking.
Tess is also a 'fallen woman', a single mother and a working servant and she faces similar plot circumstances. Yet Tess, who is distinct above her peers by her beauty and descent, faces the tragedy of her child dying, marrying and killing her seducer and execution at the end. I would like to discuss how Esther's representation is different from Tess' in identical situations, as a suggestion of why their consequences are so different. When Esther gives birth to Jackie We read how she feels and what she thinks as the narrative even stops and starts with her consciousness. The birth, although an illegitimate one, is still seen as a celebration; in stark contrast to Tess' birth, which is not even mentioned. Esther is able to confess her incident to her mother Tess mournfully procrastinates her confession to Angel and we finally read that "her narrative ended"
Esther's frankness also raises the controversial question of whether she is even repentant or not. An argument against would suggest that, especially compared with Tess, she is more concerned in persevering forward and providing for her child, than to be sorry for her actions. Yet I think her faith and understanding of God's character, although possibly small, provides her with an acknowledgment of both her wrongdoing and also her forgiveness. Moore allows Esther the voice without much comment, yet when he does comment, he does not condemn her, but praises and commends her as "heroic"
Lastly, it is worth looking closely at how else in the text Esther is given a voice.
The narrative in the paragraph  The narrative describes "Miss Mary", Esther's name for her friend, it gives us Esther's moral judgment of the activities and then stops sharply as Esther hears voices and loses her train of thought. Hardy writes long, dense scene-setting paragraphs that, although Tess may be in the scene, are completely distant from and regardless of her, whereas Moore is always concerned (often through Esther's use of rhetorical questions) with Esther in a situation. At Derby Day
Chapman writes that "the reader is aligned with Esther as she experiences her story"