The extracts from the poems Eliot share a common theme which is that of cities. In the case of the poem Whilst Hopkins 'laments the felling of poplars in the village of Binsey outside Oxford' (Spiro, handout), T. S. Eliot visualises a situation in an unknown city where fog dashes around the houses like a cat. In addition to the common elements of a rather negative description of a city and its happenings, both extracts from the much longer poems have some stylistic features in common, but at the same time are different in some instances of their use of sounds, words, figurative language, sentence structure and shapes and patterns.
The extract from Furthermore, the poem consists of iambic and trochaic feet, but there is no clear stress pattern which structures the whole poem.
The alliteration of the initial sounds such as [kw] in The choice of these sounds has an effect on the poem, since the fricatives are linked with 'friction, hissing [and] scratching' (Carter, 2001, p54), which supports the ire of the poet as he sees the felled trees as well as the approximant [w] which can be regarded as a 'continuous [flowing] sound' (Carter, 2001, p54), representing the wind and the water mentioned at the end of the poem.
Hopkins's choice of words is based upon frequent alliteration and also upon his repetition of words such as He even uses a repetition of a whole sentence pattern in line three and line five, giving the reader the feeling of an outcry and exclamatory emphasis. The change of semantics of the word Hopkins alters the word by adding Therefore the meaning, although the word An unusual word collocation can be found among line six and seven where Hopkins used an enjambment between the words Whereas In this, together with the use of Hopkins's metaphorical language is complemented by antonyms such as This reveals how well structured and how elaborate the poem
The fragment of The extract from the poem consists of eight lines in which only line six and line eight rhyme with each other. Metrically, only line one and two, due to their parallel structure, are equal, whereas the following lines have no continuous stress pattern.
Alliteration can be found for the fricative sounds [f] in As mentioned before, fricatives are regarded to cause 'friction' (Carter, 2001, p54), which the fog and smoke actually do in line one and two by rubbing their backs or muzzles against the window-panes. In addition to alliteration Eliot uses assonance in words such as
Eliot's choice of words is characterised by the repetition of words such as This repetition of individual words is complemented by the method of parallelism used in line one and two. According to Short (1996, p14), the 'interesting [thing] about parallel structures, in addition to their perceptual prominence, is that they invite the reader to search for meaning connections between the parallel structures, in particular in terms of parts which are varied.' By analysing the first two lines of this poem with regard to this statement, one recognises that they are the only ones written in the simple present with a simple sentence structure and that within these lines only the nouns
The very same words, together with several other words in this poem such as the combination of the words  Eliot's choice of such central nouns in the poem offers, along with his remarkable selection of verbs such as Throughout the poem the reader has the feeling that the fog and smoke are behaving in the manner of a cat. This is extremely metaphorical language, where one cannot be sure if 'the fog has turned into a cat, or [if] the cat has turned into the fog' (Spiro, 2004, p63), which makes use of the method of personification, or perhaps "animalisation" in this case. The word Even the colour With this change to the usual semantics and Eliot's playfulness with words in general, he emphasises the extraordinary events in this unknown city, where the cat seems to symbolise something positive in contrast to the rather negative fog and smoke.
By comparing both poems to each other, one has to recognise that, although they are from different authors and were written at a different time, they are quite similar. Both poets make an extensive use of alliteration, assonance, metaphors and repetition, and share an extraordinary point of view of a city. Whereas Hopkins laments the deforestation of trees near Oxford, T. S. Eliot let us experience a city through the eyes of smoke, fog and a cat. Beside these similarities, each poem has its special features.