August Bebel stated in his works that 'there can be no emancipation of humanity without the social independence and equality of the sexes'. This prediction suggests that there is a distinction between the two sexes or, in relation to social categories, between gender and their associated gender roles. 'A biological given sex (i.e., maleness or femaleness) is used as the basis for constructing a social category that we call gender (i.e., masculinity or femininity)." By means of this definition and the definition of gender roles as 'a set of behavioural requirements [...] that are prescribed for a society's members depending on their sex', this essay will analyse how The Good Soldier by Ford Madox Ford and Mrs Dalloway by Virginia Woolf explore the construction of gender and gender roles.
Furthermore it will examine whether these books offer two different perceptions of this topic, since The Good Soldier was written by a man around the beginning of the First World War whereas Mrs Dalloway was written by a woman after the war. Naturally, one may assume that they construct gender and gender roles in different ways. Although this can be analysed according to their use of language, this essay will mainly focus on the images and themes used in the novels, such as the women's suffrage movement, homosexuality, marriage, professional status and education, as well as the presentation of different main male and female characters, with whom the construction of gender and gender roles is explored.
After analysing The Good Soldier and Mrs Dalloway insofar as their perception of male and female characters is concerned, one can conclude that they construct gender as well as certain gender roles. As this essay has pointed out, the way of doing this is different in Virginia Woolf's work to that of Ford Madox Ford's novel. The images and themes used by the authors vary or appear at a different level of intensity. Of course, the authors are referring to their own experiences concerning gender and gender roles. Therefore, the fact that one book was written by a man, whereas the other one was written by a woman may have had an influence. Where Ford offers a rather negative perception of women, who were the cause of Edward's destruction, Woolf portrays women in conflict with society. As the war demanded certain gender roles, the perception of gender might also have changed in Mrs Dalloway in contrast to The Good Soldier, a book which was written beforehand. Although The Good Soldier pushes acceptable public boundaries, the presentation of gender and gender roles is more obvious and definitely stronger in Mrs Dalloway. However, since 'the modern period is a period of profound and marked changes in the social structure and in the psychic structures of men', both authors use certain descriptions of love, affairs, relationships and married life as well as generation differences in order to construct their ideas of gender. Beside the main characters, the minor ones, such as Nancy Rufford, as well as other characters in Mrs Dalloway and The Good Soldier, offer interesting perceptions and in general also contribute to the construction of gender and gender roles, but due to limitations of space they could only be briefly mentioned.