'Madness' is a difficult concept to define or explain. One definition offered by Phillips is that "Madness is divisive and undermining", and "when we imagine the so-called mad they appear before us in lurid or horrifying or fascinating or discomforting images." Amongst modern psychoanalysts, it has been suggested that "we are born with varying amounts of sanity and madness inside us". Many of the elements we associate with madness are instinctual and irrational, those which many psychoanalysts believe to be concentrated within the unconscious, or 'Id'. The conscious self, or 'ego', on the other hand "cannot exist in the individual from the start; the ego has to be developed". What madness reveals then is perhaps a created "second self, a stranger within, a place where all that cannot for one reason or another be expressed or realized in civil life takes up residence." The suggestion that "Madness lies in subjugation by the state," and also "in the way the state makes us subjects" can be supported by a number of literary texts and theories. However, as this essay will argue, it also lies in how we construct ourselves within society "by the intricate complex of subject and object relations that constitutes our symbolic realities."
Ken Kesey's novel One of the most prominent elements of the novel is its reflection upon contemporary reservations concerning "established psychiatric practices and institutions--lobotomy and electroconvulsive therapy, institutionalization and overreliance on drugs" Moreover, it highlights the way such medical practices were used by the state as "instruments of social purification masquerading as science with little diagnostic or therapeutic value." On one level, the novel is about the political subjugation by the state. However, it is perhaps more poignant when read as a narrative of the liberation of individuals from both political and cultural subjugation.
Towards the end of the 1950s, psychiatry had reached a prestigious peak in America. Those practicing it were regarded as "knights of reason and order saving damsels from the proliferating dragons of the mind." However, by the 1960s it seemed that "the dragons had become the psychiatrists and the institutions of psychiatric care themselves." This is personified in Her "manipulative skill and ability to destroy by insinuation render her an infuriating and insidious corporate tool." During this period it seemed to many that "the modern concept of madness was a cultural invention of control" (Foucault) and that doctors were used "as a way of keeping dangerous people at bay" (R.D. Laing). However, the threat he represents is far more complex. If relating the characters of the novel to Freud's model of the ego, one might compare McMurphy to the Id; to the primary, irrational energies of the mind which Freud characterised as "a combination of sexual libido and other instincts, such as aggression".
Having worked in a mental hospital, Kesey, too, had become suspicious of the "boundaries that had been created between sane and insane." Furthermore, he began to question whether madness lay in "the common practice [of] conforming to a mindless system or the attempt to escape from such a system altogether." Indeed, the pivotal paradox of It could be argued then that McMurphy's only madness is his relentless efforts to conquer the evils of the system. Chief Bromden also suggests this in his narration: "The thing he was fighting, you couldn't whip it for good. All you could do is keep on whipping it, till you couldn't come out any more and somebody else had to take your place." Although McMurphy is ostensibly defeated when Nurse Ratched orders him a lobotomy, the release of his soul "through the chief's love" essentially symbolises the "triumph of the spirit over repression and death." McMurphy is essentially a catalyst for the other patients to realise they have been subjugated by the state, and to reassert themselves as members of society.
On the other hand, the first person narrator, Chief Bromden is the equivalent of the ego, which "helps to carry out the process of censorship and repression." It could be argued that Bromden adopts a muted persona as a mechanism "for redirecting libido into safer channels, including repression, projection and introjection [...] rationalism and sublimation." The extent to which Bromden can be considered 'mad' is indeed questionable. Many have regarded him to be schizophrenic; however, it might be more accurate to suggest that his madness is driven by state subjugation. His paranoid suspicion of the 'Combine' could in fact be interpreted as an accurate perception of "a collaboration of governmental and industrial groups he believes are trying to control people by way of machines" However, neither the Chief, nor even Harding, blame this national Combine, or in fact anything, for rendering "some people mad and incapacitated" whilst others seem "to transcend their own limitations and the obstacles thrown in their way." It is not only McMurphy who is caught in a paradox; the "fundamental opposition" in the novel, as suggested by a number of critics, is "not between madness and sanity but between being trapped and free." It becomes possible here to question whether the presentation of individuals in Perhaps it would be more sufficient to say that, in the case of Chief Bromden, the latter part of the statement is more accurate, but also that his 'madness' stems from his own inability to construct himself within the present symbolic order.
Chief Bromden's life story provides some insight to the problems he suffers in his later life, and within the novel. Born to an Indian chief and white mother, his hybrid character is established from his birth. Through childhood he witnesses the domination and destruction of his father by both government authorities and indeed his mother. Freud suggests that "Identification is known to psychoanalysis as the earliest expression of an emotional tie with another person [...] A little boy will exhibit a special interest in his father; he would like to grow like him, and take his place everywhere. We say simply that he takes his father as his ideal." It could thus be argued that the chief is essentially without a strong male role model, which affects his own self construction; he believes that, like his father, he too is weak, and thus becomes weak. Billy Bibbit describes the Chief to McMurphy: "I think somebody m-m-measured him once at s-six feet seven; but even if he is big, he's scared of his own sh-sh-shadow. Just a bi-big deaf Indian." Furthermore, it is likely that Bromden's experiences of fighting in World War II would also have weakened him. The reasons behind his hospitalisation remain ambiguous, and it has been suggested amongst critics that, like McMurphy, the Chief was in fact sane when he entered the institution. The arrival of McMurphy on the ward initiates a process of liberation, which is driven by his natural desire to "feel alive" Freud proposed that the qualities of the Id "propel the human organism through life"
McMurphy's presence seems to aid Bromden in constructing an identity; he gains the confidence to speak and take responsibility for his own actions. This of course climaxes when he has the personal strength to euthanize McMurphy. The influence of emasculating and oppressive authorities indeed suggests that Bromden's insecurities are, to an extent, consequent of subjugation by the state. However, his liberation perhaps suggests that his 'madness' stems more from the inability to construct himself within that state. The novel ends when Bromden has found his sanity and can re-establish himself within the world.
Chief Bromden's liberation could be compared to that of Esther Greenwood in Sylvia Plath's Throughout the novel Esther struggles with the construction of her own identity. The ending of However, it could also be argued that, like Chief Bromden she has freed herself from the way the state makes her a subject and her liberation is in the ability to construct herself within the world she lives in. Marilyn Boyer proposes that "Plath was assessing the plight of the young woman artist at mid-century who was attempting to overcome the values of domesticity in a uni-polar milieu." A key element which seems to obstruct Esther's construction of her 'self' is that of gender. Boyer expands this point to suggest that "If Esther and her colleagues in New York City are victimized, it is partly due to the mindset prevalent in those times [the 1950s]: women should stay at home, cook meals, clean house, and bear children." Indeed, this might suggest that Esther's 'madness' lies in the way the state makes her subject to cultural expectations. However, this argument is problematic. It might be argued that what stimulates Esther's madness is in fact the frustration that she herself cannot, and might never be able, to do these things.
In Chapter Seven, Esther: "started adding up all the things I couldn't do." What is noticeable is the way she begins this list with particularly female gendered activities, "I began with cooking." Freud proposed that the "crucial point in gender formation is that of identification, the molding of a self from equations made between oneself and external objects through the internalization of images or models of those objects." Indeed, within this passage, Esther compares herself to her mother and grandmother who "were such good cooks I left everything to them", and "Jody, my best and only girl-friend at college" Throughout the novel she frequently forms identifications with other females she admires. Firstly, Doreen, who "made me forget my worries. I felt wise and cynical as hell" It was Betsy I resembled at heart." It might be suggested that Esther is in fact searching in others for what she herself needs to make her feel whole; no longer "melting into the shadows like the negative of a person I'd never seen before in my life." Lacan explored such ideas about "the origin of castration or loss":
It could be argued then that Esther's 'madness' lies less in subjugation by the state than in her own problematic self construction. Further into the chapter, Esther sees her "life branching out [...] like the green fig-tree". Each fig represents something that she would like to be. It is here that Plath suggests clearly the root of Esther's depression:
For Esther, this possible loss is traumatic; her 'madness' lies partly in both her inability to accept this loss and make a decision, and her attempts to aspire to an impossible perfection. This is perhaps why the ending is significant. Like Chief Bromden, Esther is able to recognise herself, and makes the decision to re-establish herself in the world, guided by others, but "perfectly free."
Jacques Lacan's theory of 'The Mirror Stage' can be employed to support this argument. He proposes that "identity is a form of
Indeed, what is significant about the human reflection is the consequent awareness of the boundaries of the body and the recognition of ourselves as distinct from other people and objects. What Malcolm MacLachlan suggests is "complex here is the paradoxical move towards acceptance of this The image we see in the mirror is referred to by Lacan as the 'ideal I', or 'ideal ego' which is "defined in the way the subject projects itself onto other objects, moves out into identification with them." This is made distinct from the 'ego ideal' which "develops when external objects are taken in or introjected." MacLachlan suggests that this "schism between of oneself and to oneself is the source of a perpetual alienation" This indeed can be applied to Esther. There are key moments within the novel when Esther cannot recognise her reflection. As early as chapter two she describes her own reflection as "The face in [the mirror] looked like the reflection in a ball of dentist's mercury." Esther's use of the third person here detaches herself from the reflection. However, a more poignant instance of this follows her suicide attempt. When given a mirror Esther, at first cannot "see what the trouble was. It wasn't a mirror at all, but a picture." The description of her reflection that follows is again in the third person: "The most startling thing about the face was its supernatural conglomeration of bright colours." The moment of recognition comes when she smiles and "The mouth in the mirror cracked a grin". Its appearance and actions point beyond itself to an inner world, but also beyond itself to a total life situation." It might be suggested then that whilst Esther struggles to recognise herself physically, this could also be read as a metaphor for her relationship with her mental self.
Boyer suggests that "Plath constructs the disabling experiences which are enmeshed into the female body as metaphors for a fractured language"; "writing the disabled body in William Watkin writes that "It is a well observed symptom of depression that language dies and that the ultimate result of life-threatening depression is total silence." Like Esther, Chief Bromden in However, where Bromden has regressed into silence before the beginning of Kesey's novel, Esther begins her narrative at the time of her writing scholarship. However, further into the narrative she decides to write a novel about the expression of 'self', yet when she tries to write about herself it becomes clear that she is trapped to such an extent that she can only respond to what she is doing at the present moment. This is echoed further in a number of episodes within the novel. When trying to read Then they associated themselves in fantastic untranslatable shapes" Soon after she attempts to write a letter to Doreen:
Boyer argues that "The major depression that Esther experiences throws her body into a disabled state that affects all aspects of her being, especially her thought processes. Her thinking becomes fragmented and her writing disjointed." The representation of Esther's individual 'madness' indeed suggests that it lies largely in her struggle to construct her sense of 'self'. Watkin suggests that "our society [is] so strictly controlled by the linguistic dictates of the symbolic order" Esther's inability to employ language suggests that this interaction is incomplete.
The writings of Becker have suggested that "The intelligence of human beings, coupled with their capacity for self-reflection, and the ability to think about the future, gives them the unique capacity to contemplate the inevitability of their own death." It might be argued that Esther's 'madness' lies in an excess of self-reflection and thought about the future; less in how the state has made her subject, and more in her inability to construct herself within it. Similarly, the Chief's adopted silence allows him to reflect upon his surroundings. However, his deeply internalised insecurities restrict his ability to consider a future beyond the hospital. Becker also believed that "humans would be rooted to inaction and abject terror if they were continually to contemplate their vulnerability and mortality". Bromden's decision to remain in the institution is perhaps a sign of this. The internalisation of state subjugation has perhaps rendered him incapable of leaving. However, his insecurities stem far deeper, his liberation demonstrating that it is the inability to construct a sense of self that has perhaps been his only downfall. Esther too has to discover how to construct her sense of self within the present symbolic order. She internalises pre-conceived ideas of femininity which causes her to perceive herself as a failure. Living within a time of transition with regard to societal roles of women, Esther, it seems, is not in fact under so much pressure to be any of the gendered things she considers. Thus, her insanity lies more in a failure to construct her own sense of self.
Both novels demonstrate that 'madness', no matter where it stems from, can be escaped. It has been suggested that "The resulting perception that one is a At the end of Esther, too, "Although interminably abused and temporarily handicapped, [...] does emerge into her own "room", beyond the stifling enclosure of the bell jar."