Both The Waste Land and Movern Callar succeed in representing a contemporary moment; each efficaciously captures the zeitgeist of their age but in highly divergent ways. Ostensibly worlds apart, many thematic similarities emerge between the texts, leading us to question how and what we define contemporary. Religion, gender and identity have remained prominent concerns across the ages and each author is unique in their depiction of how these issues impact on their contemporary society. But, the limitations of language often force the writers to resort to increasingly innovative strategies of rendering these concerns.
Religious ambivalence permeates both texts. In Movern Callar, capitalizing 'He' has religious associations if 'He' is seen to represent God. Stealing 'His' identity allows Movern to become her own God; free to lead an existential life as one self-governed and judged by herself alone. McEwan supports this believing; 'The modern novelist sees man making his own world." Existentialism seems to engender spiritual and physical liberty; 'Salif Keita sounded so good in the sunshine I stuck out my arms and started spinning round slowly." Movern appears most positive when communally external and submerged in nature, angered and distressed only when others impose on her world. Nature imparts the freedom and exhilaration she seeks, literarily making her feel high; 'The land was flattening out I was getting so high up and a hot haze had appeared in the clear bright light,' where as alcohol and substance abuse often leaves her feeling; 'queerish." March's belief that Warner's; '..youth culture is not the downtrodden city youth..but the ebullient resistance to such as a position,' can supported by Movern's almost Romantic return to childhood happiness and innocence through nature. Incongruously, Movern is drawn toward religion when in the midst of uncertainty and disappointment as in London she; 'screwed my eyes shut tight and had a little prayer. Outside it was daylightish.' 
 Movern's explicit dependence on routine and fascination with the Spanish religious precession suggests she craves the security and structure offered by faith, but by walking; 'towards strobe of the nightclub,' she unequivocally turns toward a different leading light for direction.
Like language in the contemporary world, nothing in the novel has one stable meaning, a principal faucet of much post-structuralist and post-modern thought. One strategy used by Warner to reflect this is making all images and acts explicitly subject to manifold interpretation, a motif encapsulated by the dismembered corpse. On one level, 'His' interment implies there is no God, but severing the unified body may also be demonstrative of contemporary religious multiplicity, as many reject the notion of one God and draw spiritual guidance from various religions. Religion, like the symbolic purpose of the body, is multiple. Ripping 'Him' apart may also illustrate the destruction of patriarchal dominance. Repeatedly referring to her dead boyfriend as 'He,' appears to mock the anachronistic insistence on obeying a man like a God. 'He,' is denied an identity and consequently an existence, which suggests that masculine and religious hierarchy have become obsolete in the contemporary world. If so, society may be in need of establishing new ideological frameworks. Movern's buoyant optimism when burying 'His' dissected remains, could be read as a celebratory rejection of imposed hierarchical masculine inflexibility and as an indication to embrace multiplicity, a quality often connoted to the female. Warner may be implying that future frameworks should be based on more feminine characteristics such as being open and adaptable, values necessary for social advancement. If so, libratory free-choice in both life and religion seems to be the key to freedom and contentment.
It could be argued that Warner utilizes the variability of ecriture feminine as a method of reflecting the volatile, insecure nature of language and life in the modern world. Ecriture feminine is often deemed unpredictable and flexible, which is essentially what contemporary language has become if fixed meaning is redundant. The fluidity of an ecriture feminine may therefore offer a more realistic way for Warner to reflect his contemporary world. Mengham's description of the novel as a; 'stylistically delirious and telepathic account of contemporary social derangements,' supports this suggestion, as emblematic divisions and boundaries often overlap, generating the impression of a more female writing style. Repeated images, places and phrases create a cyclic structure that opposes stereotypical male linearity, while the surreal compendium of hallucinogenic images produces an anarchic teleology that makes the text unstable and erratic, prominent characteristics of the ecriture feminine.
Movern's inconsistent femininity leads me to agree with Anderson that; 'writing about women does not necessarily make a writer 'feminist.'' Warner's feminine style is used to reflect the nature of language as opposed to make a statement about the position of women, something seemingly resistant to definition in contemporary society. Although the novel is laced with anti-patriarchal nuances, Movern remains reliant on a man, as it is her boyfriend's money that liberates her. Repeated descriptions of Movern's underwear sexualise and somewhat reduce her to the position of a fetishized object; 'I licked my fingers to roll the stockings up.' 
 Kirk supports this interpretation;
This last point is contestable as Movern is seldom a passive female; she elects her sexual partners and controls the action; 'I reached down between my legs to move his fingers correctly.' 
 Contradiction pervades each act of gender significance. Returning home pregnant with the; 'child of the raves,' fortifies the novel's cyclic structure, suggesting Movern will be trapped in a domestic maternal role. But, as the father's identity remains undisclosed the male again appears insignificant, thus reinforcing the permeable implication that men may be unimportant in the future.
Gender in contemporary society is hugely nebulous; how it is represented often proves as problematic as how it is defined. Butler argues that now; 'There is no proper gender,' believing all gender to be performance. Discourse is a highly formative part of this performance; while Movern's routines are explicitly those of a female, the extent to which a man can genuinely appropriate a woman's voice is questionable. Accepting Humm's belief that; 'gender is constructed through language and is visible in writing style;'  using direct, pithy end-stopped sentences rarely coloured by emotion make Movern appear more masculine, as conventional male language is seen as ordered and rational. If male and female speech are at opposite ends of a gendered linguistic divide, their voices cannot be unified without antithetical fracture; the credibility of Movern's female voice is therefore always contestable, as its core is essentially male. A similar conflict emerges in the Scarlet Letter. As men, Hawthorne and Warner are socially and linguistically dominant; if Warner has never been externalised by his gender, he cannot empathise with Movern's peripheral position, therefore cannot authentically render her voice.
If language is an essentially masculine medium from which woman is excluded, the female remains outside of language and is therefore silent, as was Coris Jean; 'I never spoke for four year." Such comments confirm Mills' belief that; 'We are still trapped within the notion of woman's language being deviant, powerless and submissive." If so, women must find and create their own language. Interpreting stealing 'His' voice as an empowering reversion of female subordination challenges Mills, yet, it conversely supports hegemonic notions of language as masculine, as only through a male voice, that of Warner and her boyfriend, is Movern ever heard; 'His name on the first page of that novel: By Movern Callar." Without graphological speech marks to accompany her words Movern is essentially silent, admitting herself; 'I'm a right queer-case for not talking. I'm taciturn." But, this is complicated by also expressing male speech without quotation marks. The reader is therefore led to question whether an author can or should appropriate the voice of another person. If a male writer can employ aspects of the ecriture feminine and the female has access to 'masculine' dominant discourse, then the notion of gendered language seems defunct and outdated, as in the contemporary world gender boundaries, like gendered language, overlap. Supposed 'male' and 'female' language are no longer straightforward binaries, as both Warner and Movern are published in spite of 'stealing' the voice of another sex. The relevance of authorship therefore becomes debatable, as ownership over discourse seems impossible. The literal death of the author prefigures symbolic death of authorial control; the originating conscience of the creator no longer exists making Movern's plagiarism questionable, as technically no one owns the text.
Movern concurrently rejects both moral and linguistic codes. Ignoring established grammatical rules allows her to narrate in her own sociolect, one comprised of compound neologisms, syntactic inversion and unique phonetic spellings that foreground the thematic centrality of manifesting one's identity, see; 'her mouth seeming right deep and darkish cause of the whiteishness of faces.' 
 The Guyanese poet Agard also manipulates language but in making it his own, is seen to violate English; 'mugging de Queen's English/ is the story of my life." Dismantling and restructuring language enables those like Movern who are outside of the dominant discourse, to articulate their 'story' with realism and authenticity. Substituting 'No' with 'Nut,' and Scottish colloquialisms such as; 'wee', autographically inscribe Movern's accent and culture in the novel. This demonstrates both the mutability of language and importance of marking Scotland out as devolved from England, a prominent concern for contemporary Scots. Warner unsettles notions of Scotland as substandard by revealing what is often considered the contrastive, inferior other to be disturbingly similar to the dominant. Exposing the supposed cosmopolitan antithetical Londoners as inarticulate and inept, demonstrates the equal value of Scottish discourse as they; 'talked so constant you found their blethers made less sense than locals back in the resort.'
Eliot's contemporary moment was also dominated by conflict. Lanbaum asserts; 'No poem seemed to express more of its time than The Waste Land." Adopting a cultural materialist reading of the poem seems unavoidable as much of its structure and imagery is utilised specifically to capture social disjunction. Amalgamating assorted metrical and rhythmical patterns generates an intentional chaos that reflects the uncertainty and insecurity following the First World War. Abrupt syntactic shifts convey the turbulence of an era characterized by sudden change and decaying social constancy. Fusing varied poetic forms may be representative of the difficulty inherent in establishing the desired European unity craved by many. Modernist writers began to pioneer new strategies that enabled them to express the unique concerns of the post war world, a new era unlike any other where previous literary forms began to seem inadequate. The poem's ostensibly random assimilation of images rejects order and boundaries, reflecting the zeitgeist of writers and painters engaged in a similar process. Eliot's radical deployment of literary and mythical allusions, severs the once coherent and admired words of others in order to demonstrate the destruction of stability and tradition engendered by war. A; 'heap of broken images,' without obvious connective associations dislocate history and geography, leaving the reader like those in the wasteland, disorientated and bewildered. The difficulty of deciphering complex allusive networks enables the reader to undergo a crisis of understanding that engenders a sense of humiliation. The overwhelming impossibility of understanding the allusive context of each image allows the reader to share the futility and failure plaguing the characters and age; 'We who were living are now dying/ with a little patience.'
Cyclic images convey the repetitive ennui plaguing; 'crowds of people, walking round in a ring." The poem's lack of structural progression suggests there is no escape from this perpetual psychological wasteland. Entrapped in the eternal present, past and future become indecipherable. April is the; 'cruelest month,' as the confusion between; 'memory and desire,' leaves the inhabitants of post-war Europe wishing for the merciful oblivion of a; 'forgetful snow'. Man seems incapable of progression; superficially successful city workers are imprisoned by their pursuit of monetary gain, as capitalist advancement leads to reversion and decay in the;
Pathetic fallacy animates the murky gloom shrouding a capital dominated by pessimism. Mass urbanization appears to have deprived workers of their identity and humanity, leaving them apathetic and isolated; 'Sighs, short and infrequent, were exhaled,/ And each man fixed his eyes before his feet.'
Man's emotional paralysis is exposed through Eliot's perturbing portrayal of relationships. Even when seemingly united, characters remain alienated. Alternate rhyming couplets provide a surface impression of harmony between the typist and clerk, but as the rhyme's mechanical predictability becomes apparent, an impression of monotonous indifference is created. 'Hardly aware of her departed lover', reinforces the distance between them; they are physically one but emotionally disconnected. Characters often appear imprisoned in their minds, doomed to continual misunderstanding in being unable to use language effectively. Ornate, decorative language in the 'Game of Chess,' generates an artificiality that exposes the essential emptiness of modern life. The woman is; 'troubled, confused and drowned the sense in orders,'  as too is the reader, lost in the convoluted syntax, enjambment and sparse punctuation used to illustrate her claustrophobic hysteria. The omission of inverted commas in the man's responses and absent question mark in; 'Speak to me. Why do you never speak,' suggests that we overhear only his thoughts. The position of women here lacks the ambivalence of Movern Callar, as they are explicitly passive. Disturbing allusions to Philomel imply male dominance, as refusing to speak gives the man power to prolong the woman's anxiety. Women also remain controlled sexually by men. Philomel is; 'so rudely forced,' as too is the typist describing the clerk's caresses as; 'assaults,' that are 'unreproved, if undesired." Movern can be deemed as equally subservient if her voice and actions are seen to be subject to masculine regulation. To an extent, like Lil she is trapped by pregnancy, although Movern's life is not devoted to fulfilling the sexual needs of a husband who; 'wants a good time." Ascertaining how much the position of women has changed is highly problematic; although they appear stronger in Movern Callar, women remain far from free, condemned to remain governed by their biological function to a degree.
Nameless and faceless characters pervade The Waste Land, as unsure of themselves as we are of them. No central voice dominates narration; continual changes in pronoun and tense leave the reader doubting each character's gender, nationality and perspective. Warner also depicts fragmentary characters whose personalities are often encapsulated by their nicknames. Differing concepts of identity were emerging during the Modernist period, forcing writers to resort to new modes of characterization. Like gender and language, identity has become polymorphous and heterogeneous. Chameleonic identities and the limitation of subjectivity are often seen as more post-modern concerns. Bertens claims; 'the..stable subject of modernity has been replaced by a postmodern agent whose identity is largely other-determined and always in process,' but here Eliot demonstrates that attaining a definitive sense of identity was also concern in the Modernist era. What we define contemporary again becomes contestable, as certain dilemmas are not new or exclusive to one era. Jain contests this to a degree, interpreting the poem's hetroglossic pollyvocality and dislocated vocalization as demonstrating that;
The infiltration of foreign languages supports this by creating a sense of displacement that reflects the absence of European geographical stability.
Ironically, the more languages and voices used in the poem, the less understanding seems to exist. Discontinuous, depersonalised voices often merge, as dialogue, monologue and fragmented streams of consciousness coexist confusingly. Language almost becomes a barrier that prevents communication;
Structuralist theory supports the notion that language cannot convey meaning; if the perceptual image engendered by each signifier is different to each individual reader, then we can never truly communicate with accuracy. As in many of the relationships depicted, verbal interaction appears pointless, as ascertaining a definitive sense of what someone else means through their language alone seems impossible. Experimental strategies such as objective correlative and sensory manipulation therefore become paramount in evoking elusive states of mind that language alone cannot convey. Auditory descriptions such as; 'drip drop drop drop drop,' employ repeated harsh plosive phonemes in order to emulate the abrasive and hostile nature of the dystopian future presented. Drawing our focus to only the aural properties of water make it a physical sound alone, like the deluded traveler we can only hear it as; 'there is no water." Certain inexpressible emotions are fundamentally vague and can only be realistically depicted through obscure methods such as imagery. Nature becomes a metaphor for contemporary humanity, 'sunken' and 'limp,' desperate for both literal and spiritual regeneration. Scientific progression and industrial growth led to an increased focus on the material which disturbed established notions of morality and engendered religious doubt. Infinite death appears to replace the promise of eternal life. The response to the unanswerable question; 'Who is the third who walks always beside you?" is formed by a figurative image of the grim reaper; 'There is always another one walking beside you/ Gliding wrapt in a brown mantle, hooded." Powerful visual images become a substitute for a language that is unable to articulate the horror of a modern world where hope is nonexistent.
Tobain supports this argument; 'For Eliot, these visions of contemporary society are inseparable from the loss of faith. Man no longer believes." But this is contestable if we believe the thunder offers a way forward, as the poem's focus on religious futility may be an attempt to capture a moment of extreme potential. Change is desperately needed; in unifying Buda and St Augustine, Eliot may suggest an amalgamation of Western and Eastern wisdom is the answer. As is possibly implied in the novel, nature may hold 'the key' to spiritual advancement as the elements replace God, as in the; 'empty chapel, only the wind's home." By leaving the decision to follow or reject the thunder's advice in the reader's hands, Eliot refuses to provide a conclusive resolution, a common feature of Modernist writing. The sinister repetition of; 'London Bridge is falling down falling down,' infers that man is destined to deteriorate further if he ignores this advice. The poem purposefully lacks closure; ending without a full stop implies that there is no one solution to the problems presented. I believe Murphy encapsulates Eliot's intention effectively;
As in Movern Callar, people are constantly seeking new ways of understanding the self; dissociation from others is central in both texts, but how or whether we can reconcile this remains open to contention.
Particular dilemmas continually affect humanity making it appear as though nothing is new, a key component of post-modernist thought. Both texts to an extent support Monteith's belief that; 'contemporary fiction is a barometer of the nation's intellectual health,' but what is unique to our era is made complex by the impression that similar preoccupations will always dominate the contemporary moment. Certain questions remain irresolvable as no author or age appears to have the solution, an unsettling implication that forces the reader to address the inadequacies of both man and language. The one thing seemingly set to change are the strategies used to manifest these concerns, as both Warner and Eliot show language to be as unstable and mutable as our concepts of identity, gender and religion.