Walker believes Poe; 'affirmed in his best tales and poems that literature must dramatize man's permanent moral and psychological fears." Much of his work incorporates these issues of intellectual and cultural concern, but determining the extent to which the text reflects its historical context depends heavily on the reader's interpretation, as societal comment is seldom overt or explicit. Poe favours setting his work in eerie, distant locations outside of reality such as those in 'The City in the Sea' where; 'Death has reared himself a throne/ In a strange city lying alone." As Poe's writing rarely provides a direct representation of conventional American life, the reader must explore the abstruse and concealed implications that lurk beneath his words, which can make establishing how the text reflects American society difficult.
Exclamatory discourse and accumulated caesuras disjoint linear narrative progression in 'The Tell-Tale Heart,' allowing Poe to realistically depict terror; 'Was it possible they heard not? Almighty God! - no, no!" Continual tense shifts engender temporal ambiguity, which, coupled with repetition and rhetorical questions conveys tangible hysteria and panic. Credibly enabling the reader to share this disturbing anxiety could be an attempt to reflect the undercurrent of unease felt by many Americans. Despite stereotypical images of a buoyant land fuelled by optimism, many felt troubled over the country's future direction. Angst arose in part from concern regarding mass urbanisation and people remained sceptical about exponent expansion whilst remaining a unified nation. Having the narrator; 'cut off the head and the arms and the legs' of the corpse may be a figurative allusion to the problematic unfeasibility of national division. Dismemberment has horrifying consequences here as the corpse refuses to die intensifying the atmospheric sense of unrest that pervades the tale, which may be indicative of national agitation.
The tale's principal premise, concealment and outward appearance, centres on the ubiquitous presence of a hidden corpse beneath the floorboards. It becomes a metaphor for the trepidation and malevolence lurking below a seemingly normal surface, encapsulated by the guilty dread that de-stabilises the narrator's confident faade. Whilst outwardly polite and respectful to his victim; 'calling him by name in a hearty tone, and inquiring how he had passed the night,' the narrator remains consumed by revulsion and loathing. This could be read as an implication that the idealised notion of American citizens as open, progressive and liberal was in fact deceptive. The Mexican War and slavery demonstrated that freedom and equality was far from available for all, prompting much questioning regarding the type of people and nation being built. Alliterative consonance coupled with fricative sibilance in statements such as; 'this I thought and this I think,' generates a sinister hissing sound that effectively mirrors the consistent reverberation of remorse through the narrator's mind. The overwhelming paranoia that drives the protagonist to madness, may be indicative of the guilt of a nation haunted by its wrongs and fortifies the legitimacy of Walker's previously cited statement. But, Poe's Southern origin implies a probable tendency towards the acceptance of slavery, making such deductions questionable.
Exploratory attempts to define the nature of the American character such as those by Emerson and Whitman, dominated the literary cannon. Poe's repeated use of mirroring and doubling suggests that an absolute definition is unattainable. 'Ligeia''s central thematic preoccupation with interchangeable personalities could be read as representational of Poe's possible belief in a fractured and confused American identity. Throughout the tale we remain uncertain of both Ligeia's existence and identity; she metamorphoses into Rowena and is even suggested be one with the narrator; 'did my spirit fully and freely burn with more than all the fires of her own." Enumerable manifestations of one person may reflect the overlapping, paradoxical versions of the American character that existed and consequential complexity of defining the self if it exists in multiple form. America was yet to forge an authoritative sense of history and society from which to establish a secure model of American identity, something partly attributable for its undeniably ruptured cultural character. The text may therefore be raising questions regarding how formative one's sense of country and national identity is. Interpreting 'Ligeia' as an allegory for unstable identity supports Wald's belief that; 'The reader is drawn into.. a world of uncertainty that may be either supernatural or psychological. And that uncertainty extends to the boundaries of the self.'
Many Americans were torn between the ideal and reality of the self, suspended between two worlds and identities; one brave and new, the other regressive. Abundant dichotomised binaries may be representational of this as Poe's work is littered with numerous divisions, ranging from light and dark to sanity and lunacy. In 'The Fall of the House of Usher,' oscillation between antithetical parallels provides much of the tale's energy. Roderick too is plagued by insecurity as the narrator states; 'In the manner of my friend I was at once struck with an incoherence- an inconsistency...an excessive nervous agitation." As with 'The Tell Tale Heart', palpable instability and distorted reality leaves the reader struggling to ascertain what is true, a constructive confusion that aids our understanding of the disturbed psyche, the predominant focus of Poe's work. Again he manipulates multiple identities merging Roderick's mind with the house as they simultaneously disintegrate and subside. The 'mighty walls rushing asunder', therefore mirrors his mental collapse. Effectual personification of the house's; 'vacant eye-like windows,' enables it to become a metaphoric projection of Roderick's skull, allowing the reader to enter both his home and insanity.
Ostensibly, Poe's predominant concern seems to be psychosis; he appears far more concerned with exploring the internal workings of mind rather than analysing society and culture. But, tales focused on characters so caught in their own minds and pain may be a comment on the dangers of American individualism. If so, Usher is perhaps used to highlight the danger of exclusion from human community when life becomes dominated by a materialist mentality, possibly symbolised through his home. Trapped by the weight of his house and traditions, Usher is doomed to an existence of loneliness and alienation;
Poe's linguistic dexterity here enables him to create a tangible sense of oppressive confinement and stagnation that supports Bloom's belief that; 'Death in life, Poe's recurrent image of existence without soul, epitomises the prison house of materiality.'
'Minute fungi overspread the whole exterior,' of the decaying House of Usher and may be emblematical of the potential rot in American literature without advancement into new forms. The narrator in 'Ligeia' is consumed by a 'longing for the departed' that results in his deleterious 'inexpressible madness,' which could be read as a warning against placing excessive emphasis on the past. Macabre and disturbing grisly visual images of life in death may reflect an assumed belief that American writers had failed to create anything original yet; 'the whole body took on..the livid hue, the intense rigidity, .the loathsome peculiarities of..the tenant of the tomb. ' Allusions to festering and putrefaction may therefore be an insistence on the need for active experimentation with new modes of writing and literary progression. The absence of original genres in American literature left some writers feeling a sense of responsibility to pioneer new forms and ideas. In 'The Philosophy of Composition' Poe insists on; 'keeping originality always in view', which may allow us to view his amalgamation of differing modes of writing as a post-colonial attempt to create a unique form specifically designed to enable the articulation of authentic American experience. Although innovative and atypical in content, much of his verse is traditional in form and metre, exemplified in poems such as 'The Sleeper' and 'The Valley of the Unrest.' These textual examples support Galloway's comment that; 'Poe's own poetry is often seen as poor evidence of the success of his theories of composition,' as predominantly eight syllables per line and predictable rhyming couplets make the extent to which he succeeds in making old forms new questionable.
Life in death can also be interpreted as a social comment on the peripheral position of women. Images of suppressed and entombed women may demonstrate how denying women political power and authoritative social standing made them like the living dead. Confined and incarcerated in the House of Usher, Lady Madeline is diagnosed with; 'a gradual wasting away of the person'; without a purpose and place outside of the home it could be argued that these women did not essentially exist. This may be why they are often portrayed as unreal and illusory; Lenore for example is depicted as a shadow, described as; 'Darkness there and nothing more." By imbuing women with sprits strong enough to overcome the death of the body, Poe may be urging them to fight against repressive imprisonment within the domestic sphere; 'I pray to God that she may lie/ Forever with unopened eye.' 
 Such deductions are problematic as they contradict the previous anti-individualistic nuances in Poe's work by implying that he was possibly in favour of freedom and individualism.
The absence of direct reference to social and historical context makes it difficult to ascertain with accuracy and confidence the degree to which Poe's work reflects it. This ambivalence and contradiction leads the reader to continually question and challenge their interpretations as his work may be no more than an exploration of madness, base entertainment designed to thrill and excite. It is possible that Poe had no intention of commenting on the issues examined here, but as the very essence of his style is characterised by uncertainty and ambiguity, we can never be sure. I therefore agree with Voss that;