Gender is a hugely nebulous concept, representing it often proves as difficult as defining it; Butler goes so far as to argue that; 'There is no proper gender' If so, Dickinson appears to suggest that speech is a formative part of this 'performance,' but the polarity established in her opinion is highly problematic as it utterly divides both men and women, and speech and silence. The central weakness of her statement
lies in its generality, as no one author or character is capable of representing the manifold aspects of an entire sex. As a result, I am not trying to ascertain how valid Dickinson's opinion is, nor do I wish to debate the extent to which the texts disprove or support her argument. Instead I am examining what people see as stereotypically gendered writing and characteristic of male and female in relation to speech. I will however investigate what the binaries of speech and silence may be implying about gender. I intend to concentrate on how each author uses language to create the voice or its absence, depict speech and generate eloquence. Although not directly exploring Dickinson's verse, I will briefly examine her poetry in order expose how ambivalent her own portrayal of gender is. Her work simultaneously supports and contradicts her opinion, again why I feel assessing its validity to be unfeasible and futile. As I consider her individual viewpoints and politics impossible to ascertain with certainty, I tend not to investigative the concept and cause of dread, as I believe it generated by various personal and emotional factors irrelevant to an assessment on how gendered language is created and represented.
I have chosen to examine how gender, discourse and silence is rendered in Gilman's Drawing specifically on Gender and Feminist criticism, I wish to explore what social commentary regarding gender, if any, the authors seem to offer in their illustration of how silent or vocal the men and women in their work are. Concentrating on the relevance and accuracy of established gender models in relation to speech and social role, I hope to discover how ingrained, reliable and veracious the gender stereotypes presented by Dickinson are in each text.
Men appear far from silent in Gilman's text, manifesting their voices and opinions with authority and confidence, literally and linguistically belittling the narrator. Depicted as an authoritarian husband and respected doctor, John assumes a position of intelligence and reason that enables him to confidently dismiss his wife's illness as a; 'temporary nervous depression." An impression of hegemonic male hierarchy is established by; 'My brother is also a physician, and also of high standing, and he says the same thing,' The colloquial; 'I take phosphates or phosphites-whichever it is,' 'Personally I disagree with their ideas,'
John explicitly infantilises the narrator, condemning her to a subsidiary position by condescendingly referring to her as; 'little girl' Aligning the female to the same helpless, inconsequential position of a child, could be read as demonstrative of female dependency, as women were expressly reliant on men both socially and economically. John's refusal to even allow her to walk unaided supports this; 'he gathered me up in his arms, and just carried me upstairs and laid me on the bed..and read to me." Repeatedly interpolating the conjunction 'and' is reminiscent of childlike language and helps demonstrate how treating women in such a way diminished their dignity and confidence in their capabilities. The asexual parental relationship established between them creates a resolute power imbalance where John is firmly dominant, as he; 'takes all care from me." Demoted by her inability to fulfil her maternal obligations, the narrator is made obsolete, submerged in a demoralized sense of incompetence that drives her to create a new purpose in life, writing her journal; 'I The italicised modal verb generates a sense of insistency that demonstrates the force of female resolution. Much Gender and Feminist criticism insists that language is an essentially masculine medium from which woman is excluded. Such firm insistence on the need for women to find a medium that allows them to express their experiences with authenticity could be read as a feminist statement.
Copious first person personal pronouns embed the voice of a specifically female narrator in the text, allowing her to use language as a method of reversing her conventionally inferior marginality in assuming the position of centralised 'I.' Within an otherwise circumscribed existence where she is silenced by her gender, control over narrative direction empowers the speaker by allowing her to experience the governance John takes for granted, while challenging Mills' belief that; 'We are still trapped within the notion of woman's language being deviant, powerless and submissive." But because narratorial reliability crumbles, it becomes impossible to argue that the text entirely contradicts this statement as this collapse could be read as an intimation that female language is essentially weak and prone to breakdown. The extent to which we can trust her narrative and judgement is contestable throughout. Initially, logical and considered opinions suggest a strong sense of self in spite of oppression that engenders the reader's sympathy and confidence in the narrator, Such inconsistency makes the narrative multiple and fluid, specifically female characteristics according to French Feminist critics In agreeing with Humm that; 'gender is constructed through language and is visible in writing style,'
Fetterly disagrees believing; 'she experiences anxiety, contradiction and ambivalence in the act of writing,' not because her voice is characteristically female but; 'because she is imprisoned in John's house and text." If writing and language is seen as open only to the male, it could be argued that the collapse of the narration is inevitable, as masculine language is an ineffective medium for the female to use. The text therefore may be an attempt to demonstrate the difficulty faced by women in trying articulate their voices within the constraints of masculine language. Prohibiting the narrator's writing keeps her within the circumscribed confines of the domestic world and reinforces John's masculine supremacy; 'he hates me to write a word." By repressing her voice, John drives her further towards madness in not allowing her to manifest her concerns; 'he looked at me with such a stern, reproachful look that I could not say another word." John is expressly reported to talk far more than the narrator, using his power to manipulate language in order to dominate the verbal exchanges between them. Finally verbalising an opinion that she is failing to improve, John corrodes her confidence and silences her by using comparatively longer and more dense syntax, repeated allusions to his Doctorial status and numerous patronising endearments. John is so pleased to see me improve." It is implied that had he adopted a position of silence in listening to her fears, she may have been saved from madness; 'So of course I said no more on that score..and lay there for hours trying to decide whether that front pattern.. really did move.'
The contrastive distinction between verbal and written communication demonstrates how problematic assessing the text in light of Dickinson's opinion is, due to the need to distinguish what we define as 'talk;' whether we take it to mean literal verbal manifestation of the voice, or narration. Although vocal and authoritative in her narration, the general lack of direct speech and reporting clauses that pertain to her actually engaging in dialogue, imply that outside of her writing the narrator is condemned to a silent existence, peripheral and ignored because of her illness and gender. On one of the rare occasions where she actually 'talks,' she uses; 'a quiet, a very quiet voice, with a most restrained manner,' But, this 'voice' is a written voice as by 'talk' she essentially means write, in example; 'I will talk about the house." By predominantly narrating thought and not speech, it could be argued that she is ultimately silent as only herself and the reader hear her voice. Enumerable pauses and interruptions marked by asterisks continually disjoint the narrative, creating a lack of linearity again characteristic of the They also generate a physical graphological space and emptiness on the page that may be representative of her silence outside of writing.
Ironically, the narrator is highly eloquent in articulating her madness, paradoxically remaining lucid and coherent in her descriptions of the wallpaper; 'The colour is repellent, almost revolting; a smouldering unclean yellow, strangely faded by the slow turning sunlight." Alliterative consonance and heaped polysyllabic adjectives help draw the reader into her confusion. This almost poetic use of language demonstrates a verbal artistry that is testament to her ability to express herself with linguistic dexterity. Tactile olfactory imagery pertaining to the; 'yellow smell', Personification and active dynamic verbs animate the paper's movement allowing us to understand how she comes to believe it is a live presence; 'imagine a toadstool in joints... budding and sprouting in endless convolutions." The wallpaper, like her mind, lacks linear order, but although infectious and decaying both remain fertile and productive; 'There are always new shoots on the fungus." It could be argued that the wallpaper in; 'committing every artistic sin,'
Madness is a problematic concept; while demonstrative of the consequences of attempting to silence and confine women, it conversely seems to offer freedom from patriarchal subjugation; although the narrator becomes increasingly silent in her progressive insanity, she also appears more confident and self-assured;
Like Hester to an extent, in silence she finds empowerment, as her assertive tone implies a sense of pride in her newfound purpose; I have something more to expect, to look forward to, to watch.'
The wallpaper may also be metonym for patriarchal dominance as it too; 'slaps you in the face, knocks you down, and tramples upon you." Her fight with the wallpaper could be read as demonstrative of her fight to speak out against gender inequality. But, it is depicted as an overwhelming force impossible to escape; enumerable heads illustrate the manifold forms of patriarchy, fortifying its power and emphasising the futility of her battle; 'But nobody could climb through that pattern-it strangles so, I think that is why it has so many heads." Her failure to conquer it results in the loss of her mind and identity, a central thematic preoccupation fortified by the absence of her name and seeming metamorphosis into the woman in the wallpaper; 'I suppose I shall have to get back behind the pattern when it comes night." The narrative voice merges with that of the imaginary figure making it difficult to ascertain who exactly is speaking, as the central 'I' collapses into a multiple persona.
Utterly unimpeded direct discourse implies that madness allows the narrator to find her voice and achieve freedom of speech; '"I've got out at last" said I "In spite of you and Jane. And I've pulled off most of the paper, so you can't put me back!" Finally expressing herself without concern regarding how she will be perceived, in her mind the narrator has escaped and is victorious. But, the reader is painfully conscious that doing so will probably result in her institutionalisation. Seemingly unaware of the threat of this perennial entrapment, her perceptual freedom allows her to finally overthrow the patriarchal repression that has silenced her throughout.
Manifold gendered voices overlap with complexity in Specifically aligning himself with Hester, her story of 'human frailty and sorrow' Fuelled by his disillusioned disappointment in the men around him, Hawthorne initiates the central theme of hypocrisy in his depiction of 'the patriarch,' Images of decay illustrate the degeneration of patriarchy and strengthen the text's conclusive nuance that social evolution lies in centring society on female ethics; 'The angel and apostle of the coming revelation must be a woman." Desiring to distance himself from these men drives Hawthorne to emphasise his understanding and compassion, stereotypically female characteristics that fortify our faith in his ability to manifest the female voice and persona; 'I experienced a sensation not altogether physical..of burning heat; as if the letter were not of red cloth, but red-hot iron." Martin believes this moment makes Hawthorne and Hester one;
I disagree to an extent believing Hawthorne's defence of those who live by their own morals not to be an attempt to demonstrate the plight of the ostracized female, but an effort to justify his desire to manifest his own voice through writing. Hawthorne's well-documented sense of shame and inferiority in having chosen to do so enables him to empathise effectively with Hester's inner conflict and disgrace; '"What is he?" murmurs one..of my forefathers.."A writer of storybooks!..what mode of..being serviceable to mankind..may that be?"' Vehemently emphasising the parallels between them may be a method of bolstering his narrative authority; an attempt to demonstrate an admirable ability to understand and write the female voice in order to engender the respect and approbation he feels necessary to prove the worth of his work to himself and society.
But, the extent to which a man can accurately take on a woman's voice is questionable. As male, Hawthorne holds a dominant linguistic and societal position making whether he can ever truly understand the position of other and subordinate debatable, as he is never excluded from hegemonic language and ideology. If he has never genuinely been made external or silenced by his gender, it could be argued that he cannot truly empathise with Hester, so cannot authentically render her voice. This further suggests that they can never become one. If male and female speech are at opposites ends of a gendered linguistic power divide, If we accept stereotypical definitions of male speech, this masculine core may be why her discourse is characterised by eloquence. But, the text's representation of speech tends to challenge the accuracy of these gendered speech models.
The verbal interaction between Hester and Dimmesdale in the woods contradicts what are considered the typical characteristics of male and female speech. Traditionally male language is defined as linear, ordered and rational, whereas female speech is seen as hesitant, illogical and disordered. Conversely Hester is articulate and rational, using shorter fully formed, end-stopped sentences to calm and reassure him; 'You have deeply and sorely repented. Your sin is left behind you." She is almost like John here, adopting a paternal role in having to soothe and control Dimmesdale. This impression is fortified by her organization and initiative in planning their escape; persuasive imperative verbs generate inspiration and energy allowing her to empower and fortify Dimmesdale with her own vigour; 'Preach! Write! Act!" Imploring; 'Think for me Hester! Thou art strong. Resolve for me!" establishes a disproportionate power division between them that allows Hester to linguistically and literally assume the dominant position, but unlike John she does not use it to manipulate and enervate Arthur.
In spite of holding a more 'masculine' position of control, Hester remains maternal and giving, continually sharing her strength;
Language in the text is therefore explicitly made open to interpretation, as the implications generated by certain words are shown to be subject to dramatic alteration. The nature of Hester's speech is impossible to generalise as its more 'male' attributes dissolve when she is overcome by forceful love; her discursive strength collapses into disjointed exclamatory discourse when faced with the possibility of losing Pearl; 'raising her voice almost to a shriek,' she cries; 'Ye shall not take her! I will die first!" Here Hester appears to conform to the stereotypical model of an impassioned female ruled by feeling, but retaining her aggressive tone challenges the expectations of age when women were traditionally passive. Gender boundaries, like gendered speech therefore overlap. As supposed 'male' and 'female' speech features are amalgamated in both characters, such discourse models seem an inadequate method of assessing gender and eloquence, as they tend to overly simplify the differences between them.
Hawthorne's depiction of silence is as contradictory as his representation of gender, as it is generated by and demonstrative of divergent characteristics. The emphasis on Hester as a visual rather than vocal presence may support this interpretation; detailed descriptions of her external appearance imply that she is a figure who is seen more than heard, reducing her somewhat to the position of object, But, Hester also finds might in her silence, refusing to let her peripheral position quell her sprit or love; 'I might endure his agony, as well as mine." Carrying the onerous secret for them both augments her strength, making her compassionate and self-sufficient; as one unable to look to others for support she is forced to draw on her inner-resilience. Unlike Gilman's protagonist, she is not sent mad by; 'the strange and solitary anguish of her life,'
Interaction between male protagonists differs greatly to that between women who openly admit their wrongs and pains, finding comfort in sharing and talk; 'people brought all their sorrows and perplexities, and besought her consul." Conversely, Dimmesdale and Chillingworth use tense, loaded speech that engenders much dread; 'Alas, to judge from the gloom and terror in the depths of the poor minister's eyes, the battle was a sore one." Fear, anxiety and Puritanical hypocrisy shape their exchanges; the need to maintain the fa
In spite of copious sanctimonious moralising, Chillingworth is equally as deceptive, concealing his past, suspicions and true objective. His speech is characterised by relentless psychological bullying, sinister unsettling insinuations and malicious threats that make him an ominous and menacing presence; 'His fame, his position, his life, will be in my hands. Beware!'
It could be argued that the text does little portray men favourably; Arthur's explicitly; 'eloquent voice'
The purpose of Dimmesdale's oration is to engender the respect and admiration of his parishioners, which implies that he uses his rhetorical power to manipulate people's opinion of himself, not unlike Hawthorne. Placing communal respect above self-respect, he is ultimately destroyed by the impossibility of his duel existence; 'I your pastor.. am utterly a pollution and a lie." Like his speech, Arthur's silence is subject to his own control. In spite of longing to; 'speak out, from his own pulpit, at the full height of his voice, and tell the people what he was,' As in the preceding text, his final gesture of empowerment is futile because self-destructive, as here too unimpeded speech ultimately leads to destruction. Speaking freely at last, he rejects social approval and the silencing repression of patriarchy and religion, but is never shown to face the consequence of doing so. The extent to which he becomes a true man in speaking aloud is therefore questionable. Even during his dramatic confession, Dimmesdale is explicitly reliant on Hester imploring; 'Come, Hester, come! Support me up yonder scaffold." This image has firmly feminist undertones, as only when expressly supported by two women is he strong enough to manifest his real voice.
Hawthorne's predictive depiction of a matriarchal society is radical and progressive;
This fortifies the novel's ubiquitous suggestion that social advancement is dependent on communities becoming more nurturing and accommodating. This appears to corroborate Cixous' belief that celebrating the female as a symbol of plenitude and multiple capacity can reverse the Lacanian view of woman as lack. If so, in opening up the feminine in himself and his writing, Hawthorne could be deemed Feminist. According to Jouve;
Hawthorne's depiction of Hester's 'fantastic ingenuity' Hawthorne's representation of Pearl seems to illustrate a new generation of women. Her voice is subject to her control alone, she continually refuses to be silenced by Hester who on repeated occasions is forced to warn; 'Hush Pearl, hush! Thou must not talk so." Frequently questioning, she is free and unimpeded in speech, her voice making her confident and 'dauntless." She resolutely refuses to adapt the way she talks, manifesting her opinions and queries without concern for their consequences;
Both texts demonstrate how divergent gender characteristics can be manifested in both speech and silence. Each supports and disproves Dickinson's opinion on different occasions, helping advocate why I believe it to be too limited in its division to apply directly to either text. The lack of continuity regarding each author's representation of speech and silence may be partly attributable to the impact of the individual writer's gender, but the extent of this influence is impossible to ascertain. Because we will never know what personal and social factors motivate their depictions, how feminist either writer is, if at all, and their sexual politics are made impossible to establish with conviction.
Dickinson's poetry itself rarely makes overt statements regarding gender as she seldom inflects the speaking voice with a gendered identity, and even when she does, it is often tenuous and changeable. Polarity and opposites pervade her verse and are suggestive of a dual attitude towards the issues raised in her poems on love and marriage. Omitting certain words and multiple phrase meanings often make it difficult to discern how direct or ironic she intends her tone to be. Poem 273 seems to imply that women are trapped and repressed by men; 'He put the Belt around my life/ I heard the Buckle snap." A similar metaphoric suggestion of the cessation of freedom in marriage emerges in poem 1072, where elliptical progressions suggest that the birth of the wife results in the death of the woman who is; 'Born-Bridalled-Shrouded' I cheered my fainting Prince-/ I sang firm-even- Chants-." This substantiates Foster's belief that;
Poem 199 uses speech marks to graphologically emphasize the labels and markings that shape female existence; 'I'm "wife"- I've finished that-/ That other state-/ I'm Czar- I'm "woman" now-/' While certain undertones seem to mirror those manifested in the texts examined, they are not without contradictory elements and ironically demonstrate the difficulty of applying her own opinion to her work. Although seemingly radical and feminist on occasion, no nuance is beyond contention.
Both texts in their representation of speech and silence reveal how narrow and restrictive gender ideologies can be by exposing how the culturally constructed differences that distinguish us as feminine and masculine, are subject to multiple variations ranging from period and religion, to individual temperament. They prove how limited gendered speech models can be, while simultaneously supporting Mills' belief that; 'gender is a variable affecting both our language competence and..expectations about language use." Limiting the examination of gender to how it is manifested by either discourse or silence alone is reductive in my opinion, due to the existence of so many varied methods of gender expression that challenge the implications generated by how it is rendered through language. Like Dickinson's quotation and gender itself, the texts demand continual questioning as each depiction and insinuation remains open to perpetual interrogation, part of the appeal and frustration inherent in each text.