Murphy describes The Waste Land as a; 'masterful stroke, the deconstruction of literature for the sake of reconstructing it in the image of the Modern Age." Although radical and experimental in his approach to narration, the degree to which Eliot has lost faith in its necessity is debatable. Character and mood are central in the poem as are they in Conrad's Heart of Darkness, but the extent to which they replace narrative is contestable, as both Eliot and Conrad often rely on structure to create mood and character. Establishing a definitive notion of what constitutes narrative is also problematic, as it can often be seen as a component of form, which makes it imperative to examine the structure employed in each work. The construction and definition of narrative differed in each writer's period, making it like mood and character, a concept that is characterised by indeterminacy.
Ostensibly, repeated metaphoric and literal emphasis on journeying suggests the Heart of Darkness will employ a traditionally sequential narrative; 'Watching the coast as it slips by the ship is like thinking about an enigma. There it is before you-smiling, frowning, inviting." Progressive, present tense dynamic verbs create an immediacy and insistence that move both the reader and boat forward, providing a superficial impression of linearity. Temporal elasticity complicates this as Marlow continually moves between the past and present tense. By superimposing present day awareness on reminiscence, the narrative is able to realistically mirror the flow of cerebral consciousness, as it too is subject to disruption and works by associative rather than linear logic. Recurrent digressions, pauses and reflections punctuate Marlow's meditative introspection, creating both vocal credibility and a discontinuous narrative. Preventing the interior monologue from advancing in a strictly chronological manner raises questions about the nature of progression; one of the novel's key tropes. Narrative is far from defunct in the novel as it often used to fortify thematic preoccupations, leading me to agree with Brooks that Conrad;
Conrad's innovative use of narrative is far from traditional as the novel is comprised of a series of framed narratives that lack exclusive confines. Juxtaposing multiple vantage points engenders an aura of confusion. The river image, like the narrative, parallels motifs such as disorientation; 'you lose your way on that river as you would in a desert, and butted all day long against shoals, trying to find the channel." Narrative therefore operates on both a symbolic and structural level, as the emblematic layers generated by using structure to mirror content, enriches certain moods. Lothe's belief that there is a; 'remarkably productive interplay of narrative method and thematics,' can be supported by Conrad's confusion of time and tense, as it creates the impression of a cyclic narrative. Culminating where it originates in both location and speaker makes the reader question how far the narrative actually progresses, thus highlighting the illusory nature of what Conrad's society deemed progression. Resisting linearity utilizes structure to depict the intrinsic paralysis and stagnation inherent in an interminable journey, whilst demonstrating the interdependence of form and content. Recurrent fog imagery employs pathetic fallacy to fortify this impression of impenetrability and immobilization, as it makes the crew feel as; 'if we had been buried miles deep in a heap of cotton-wool. It felt like it too-choking, warm, stifling.'
By refusing to deploy a conclusive culmination, Conrad, like Eliot to an extent, uses structural unpredictability to capture the unrest of an age suffused by uncertainty. Scientific progression and the growth of industry led to an increased focus on the material, disturbing established notions of morality while engendering religious doubt. Omitting a categorical ending could be seen as a rejection of the traditional story form. Although structural experimentation allows Conrad to create a new type of narrative, it does not dismantle its importance and purpose; conversely it seems to foreground the necessity of narrative, almost restoring our faith in the need for form. The light we expect brought to darkness is denied and contradictions remain unresolved in order to focus our attention on what is absent; 'The inner truth is hidden-luckily, luckily.',  Like Marlow we yearn to hear Kurtz speak but he never assumes the position of narrator. His voice is relayed through disjointed and vague fragments of reported speech that offer none of the explanations we desire; 'Live rightly, die, die...." Exposing one considered a; 'prodigy..an emissary of pity, and science, and progress,' as a; 'pitiful dupiter,' enables the reader to truly share Marlow's frustration thus making dissatisfaction a palpable force; Marlow's tangible disillusionment is that of the age. Mood, narrative structure and character can therefore be seen as interdependent and interweaving, as they are often made more efficacious by intersecting. Kurtz is a highly complex character who simultaneously functions as an intriguing example of humanity and structural core. Like his legend, Kurtz is an empty faade, the epitomic hollow that is the missing formal closure craved by the reader and Marlow. Both are enigmatic, elusive and magnetic; they draw us forward but do not exist; 'He was just a word to me.. Do you see him? Do you see the story? Do you see anything?" Narrative and structure therefore remain key components of the novel.
Modernist texts provide intellectual engagement by resisting passive reading; challenging the reader to decipher abstruse imagery and concealed inferences allows them to become a co-creator of meaning. The narrative continually forces the reader to re-asses their opinions, allowing them to undergo a journey into the self. Conrad's preoccupation with penetrating the psyche is revealed through repeated allusions to densely layered vegetation; 'The river side bushes were certainly very thick; but the undergrowth was evidently penetrable." Whether we should enter the metonymic 'undergrowth' that is the mind, is made questionable by a narrative structure that purposefully penetrates then withdraws. Marlow symbolically penetrates the self by literally infiltrating the jungle, but providentially retreats;
Having been; 'permitted to draw back my hesitating foot,' 
 Marlow is salvaged from a similar fate to Kurtz by his augmented knowledge of humanity. Najder's opinion jars with the suggestion that Conrad focuses on exploring mind and character, as he believes;
Reading Kurtz as a Faustian warning regarding the corruptive power of ambition supports this evaluation as he is both literally and figuratively consumed by hubris, reduced to a; 'cage of ribs all astir." Kurtz's physical starvation emulates that of his soul, as his fanatical materialism has eroded his sense of humanity and morality leaving him; 'like a vapour exhaled by the earth.'
Conversely, Curle believes Conrad's figures are; 'rounded out with extraordinary fullness,' but much evidence contradicts this; they are often purposefully ambiguous and incomplete, emblematic of moods and ideas. I am therefore increasingly inclined to support Najder's argument that Conrad uses characters to; 'focus our attention on problems rather than personalities." Crawling, bald and enervated, Kurtz becomes pitifully dependant, explicitly infantilised as a demonstration of how capitalist progression can lead to human degeneration. Conrad complicates the binary between culture and civilization through Kurtz, as his desire for wealth and imperialist advancement results in a return to what is base and savage in man; Kurtz becomes the; 'soul.. of sham distinction, of all the appearances of success and power." Contrastive opposites create paradoxical images of evolution and success that force the reader to confront the contradictions of imperialism;
The cyclic narrative structure and evocations of regression fortify the suggestion that progress actually leads to demise if it incites economical, cultural and geographical violation.
Confusing dichotomies permeate the text. New and experimental symbolic binaries unsettle the reader's expectations, making them question the degree to which they accept certain hegemonic ideologies. Black is traditionally connoted to evil, but here explicitly white characters use violent, primitive methods to tame the dark natives and jungle. The symbolic association of white, like the white people, is corrupted. The chief accountant is sheathed in white, blinding the vision of those around in order to conceal the metaphoric darkness of his monetary greed. Conventionally connoted to purity, ivory ironically corrupts men by enticing them to build wealth instead of civilization. Kurtz, like ivory becomes polluted; ''ivory' rang in the air...you would think they were praying to it. A taint.. blew through it all, like a whiff from some corpse." Whiteness is further manipulated by being associated with death, as Kurtz in his skeletal state is an; 'animated image of death carved out of ivory.' The image of white bones evokes notions of fossils, thus implying that humanity faces moral extinction if ethical frameworks continue to be scarified to avarice. Conrad again reveals an admirable ability to capture mood and character, yet remains dependent on narrative to do so.
In 'The Game of Chess,' Eliot too successfully demonstrates that the creation of mood and complex character need not be at the expense of telling an interesting story. The reader becomes drawn into the fascinating world created through the characters presented. Ornate, decorative language generates an artificiality that exposes the essential emptiness of modern life. The woman is; 'troubled, confused and drowned the sense in orders,'  as too is the reader, lost in the convoluted syntax, enjambment and sparse punctuation used to illustrate her claustrophobic hysteria. Characters in the poem often appear imprisoned in their minds, doomed to continual misunderstanding in being unable to use language effectively. The omission of inverted commas in the assumed man's responses and absent question mark in; 'Speak to me. Why do you never speak,' suggests that we overhear only his thoughts. Accustomed to the woman's habitual questioning, he sees no point in replying. His flippant indifference reveals an unsettling lack of communication between the sexes. Much is deliberately and literally unsaid, making suggestibility as powerful here as it is in the novel. Character seems to not only replace the need for narrative but also mood on occasion. Even when seemingly united, characters remain alienated. Alternate rhyming couplets provide a surface impression of harmony between the typist and clerk, but as the rhyme's mechanical predictability becomes apparent, an impression of monotonous apathy is created. 'Hardly aware of her departed lover', reinforces the distance between them; they are physically one but emotionally disconnected and isolated.
Unlike Conrad, Eliot severs the conventional unity between plot and character by depicting fragmentary snatches of individuals that demonstrate how narrative is no longer a necessary component of character creation. Lanbaum views this as a; 'reaction against the Nineteenth century belief in the individual as the one reality you could be sure of,' which may be why no stable identity exists in The Waste Land. Characters are mainly nameless and faceless, as unsure of themselves as we are of them. Differing concepts of identity were emerging during the period, which may be why writers resorted to new and innovative modes of characterization. No central voice dominates narration; continual changes in pronoun and tense leave the reader doubting each character's gender, nationality and perspective. Hetroglossic pollyvocality and dislocated vocalization ensures that mood, like character is subject to abrupt and instantaneous change. Jain believes;
The infiltration of foreign languages supports this by creating a sense of disorientating displacement that reflects the absence of European geographical stability.
Ironically, the more languages and voices used in the poem, the less understanding seems to exist. Discontinuous, depersonalised voices often merge, as dialogue, monologue and fragmented streams of consciousness coexist confusingly. Language appears to have become a barrier that prevents communication;
Language, like narrative seems inadequate and defunct, as neither has the power convey the complex workings of the human mind. The omission of explanatory connections between images may be a method of representing the processes of imagination, making the poem, like the novel, a journey into the self. It could be argued that because certain inexpressible emotions are fundamentally vague, they can only be realistically depicted through obscure methods such as imagery. Eliot can therefore be seen as generating a new way to communicate, using mood and image in place of narrative.
Powerful visual images become a substitute for a language that is unable to articulate the horror of a future where hope is nonexistent; 'He wept. He promised "a new start."' The response to the unanswerable question; 'Who is the third who walks always beside you?" is formed by a figurative image of the grim reaper; 'There is always another one walking beside you/ Gliding wrapt in a brown mantle, hooded." Infinite death appears to replace the promise of eternal life. The desert therefore becomes a metaphoric representation of a Godless world if we agree with Coote that; 'The landscapes are the landscapes of the mind." He goes on to argue the poem; 'ends with the narrator sitting amid the wreck of urban culture, threatened by madness and longing for the peace of God,' but this becomes contestable if we believe the thunder offers a way forward. By leaving the decision to follow or reject its advice in the reader's hands, Eliot like Conrad refuses to provide a conclusive resolution. The sinister repetition of; 'London Bridge is falling down falling down,' infers that man is destined to sink and fall continuously if he ignores this advice. Like the novel, the poem lacks closure; ending without a full stop implies that there is no one solution to the problems presented.
Seemingly having lost faith in narrative and language, Eliot is forced to experiment with other methods of creating meaning, hence an increased reliance on divergent literary techniques. Objective correlative and sensory manipulation become paramount in evoking elusive moods and states of mind. Auditory descriptions such as; 'drip drop drop drop drop,' employ repeated harsh plosive phonemes in order to emulate the abrasive and hostile nature of the dystopian future presented. Drawing our focus to only the aural properties of water make it a physical sound alone, like the deluded traveler we can only hear it as; 'there is no water.' Tactile and olfactory images also employ sensory deception in order to blur the distinction between reality and illusion. Nature is often made a metaphor for humanity; 'sunken' and 'limp,' both are desperate for literal and spiritual regeneration. Topographical aridity and personification illustrates the unbearable thirst suffered by both man and nature in images such as the; 'Dead mountain mouth of carious teeth that cannot spit." De-familiarization also becomes an imperative replacement for narrative. Water, like whiteness in the Heart of Darkness, becomes a paradox, connected to both sterility and fertility, as repeated depictions of polluted, dirty water manipulate its symbolic properties; 'The river sweats/ oil and tar." Explicitly perverting water's regenerative elements reflects the absent promise of salvation through eternal life. This fortifies the despondent mood engendered by images of false prophets and spiritual impotence that trap; 'hooded hordes swarming over endless plains, stumbling in cracked earth.'
Allusion becomes a dominant force in the poem as a metaphorical and literal; 'heap of broken images,' takes the place of a traditional narrative. Cryptic cross-connections create a relational rather than sequential structure, as the significance of certain images only becomes apparent through their interaction with other allusions. The difficulty of deciphering complex allusive networks enables the reader to undergo a crisis of understanding that engenders a sense of humiliation. The overwhelming impossibility of understanding the allusive context of each image allows the reader to share the futility and failure plaguing the characters and age; 'We who were living are now dying/ with a little patience." Understanding the poem's mood is frequently more important than understanding its story. The absence of a conventional narrative structure often goes unnoticed, as mood proves a far more powerful method of conveying meaning. Stead's argument that; ''texture' was all-important and 'structure' only a shadow,' can be used to support this. Superficially, the amalgamation of assorted metrical and rhythmical patterns eliminates an external impression of structural order. Form itself is paradoxical in the poem, as it appears simultaneously cyclical and disjointed. If the narrative cannot be concurrently processual and cyclic, then fusing these forms may be the ultimate rejection of structure; by arguing that they cancel each other out, narrative and structure cease to exist to an extent. But, the resultant assimilation of images without coherent, connective associations, generates an intentional chaos that becomes the poem's structure. Although Eliot appears to have lost faith in the concept of narrative, the degree to which he truly rejects structure, is questionable.
Adopting a Cultural Materialist reading of the poem challenges Stead's opinion, as structure becomes vital if we believe it serves a representative purpose. The surface impression of structural absence can be seen as deliberate if Eliot, like Conrad uses form to mirror society. The seemingly random compendium of literary and mythical allusions, may sever the once coherent, admired words of others in order to replicate the destruction of stability and tradition engendered by war. Abrupt syntactic shifts appear to convey the turbulence of an era characterized by sudden change and decaying social constancy. Fusing varied poetic forms may be demonstrative of the difficulty inherent in establishing the European unity craved by many. If so, Bradbury's argument gains credibility as he believes the poem's; 'ultimate strength' to be its; ''lack of 'purism', and its capacity to maintain a pragmatic and multi-directional momentum.'
How narrative is deployed and its significance inevitably differs between the texts, as each is the product of a divergent time and society, thus making it difficult to generalize regarding narrative function. Both writers pioneer variants on the traditional narrative form that enable them to articulate their own unique concerns. The extent to which this eliminates the necessity of narrative becomes questionable, as structure is what often allows them to do so with such success. Narrative is not eradicated but altered; it may no longer appear in a familiar and recognizable from but it still exists. Mood and complex character have not become an outright substitute for narrative but have become as structurally important. Ironically, they do not replace interesting stories; rather they enable the writer to tell them. Experimentation and progress is key in both literature and the Modern period; narrative seems to have become an evolutionary technique not a redundant one, leaving me inclined to agree with Guetti that; 'as the narrative develops it is redefined so as to deny the basic assumptions upon which it appears to be constructed.'