Cultural upheaval and political instability inevitably changed the climate and definition of tragedy. Theological speculation and the revival of epicureanism led to people being suspended between faith and reason. Such issues permeate Dollimore argues that it portrays a 'social order which exploits people on grounds of race, gender and class." Sinfeild therefore implies that Iago is interpolated into his misogyny and racism as character's 'outlook is supported by their social context." Tension between tumultuous emotion and strict political formality is inherent within
New Historicism allows us examine the text within its genre. Unlike other Renaissance tragedies, such as Marlowe's Dr Faustus, Ribner disagrees, viewing Othello as 'the conventional morality play hero." Shakespeare transcends the conventions of classical tragedy by discarding certain traditions such as the chorus and infiltrating new devices. Ribner believes;
Some view It has catharsis, anagorisis and evokes fear amongst the audience. Othello believes himself to be a tragic hero, having to face moral choice, fall from grace due to harmatia and redeem himself. Othello's melodramatic proclamations compare his suffering to that of Job and Tantalus;
Ribner believes that; 'Othello reflects the... pattern of the Christian soul ensnared by sin, but who through suffering and self-knowledge learns to overcome it." But, for Aristotle, the downfall of an evil protagonist is cathartic, not tragic. Shakespeare challenges this, oscillating the audience between hating and pitying Othello as he is an 'honourable murderer." Wine supports this, stating;
As Because Othello is not a monarch, the range of tragedy is significantly diminished and only effects a few individuals.  As Shakespeare's shortest play, action is concentrated and Dubrow believes this to be; 'more effective since its compactness makes it more...vivid,'
Subsidiary characters and events mirror the central dissension, heightening the emotional intensity, whilst the lack of effective subplot adds to the claustrophobic atmosphere. The opening senate scenes are deceptive as we are led to expect a political drama, but when the expedition is aborted the action turns in on itself. The storm is both a rhetorical and narrative device, acting as a literal symbol of imminent conflict and as a metaphor for violent and destructive jealousy. Audiences may have seen sexual jealousy an insufficient motive for tragedy as it traditionally dealt with what was divine, not animalistic in man. Yet, sexual passion is central to the tragedy of Moral conflict between rationality and passion is central to the play's structure.
Political instability permeates the play, heightening the suspense and uncertainty thus creating an unsettled feeling. The omnipresent danger of war adds to the audience's accumulated anxieties. The binary forces of politics and love are juxtaposed in direct contention and the struggle for dominance between them establishes the central tension around which all else revolves. Othello promises to balance both, but love takes precedence over his military role despite his ironic promise to never allow 'light-winged toys of feathered cupids,' Matheson draws attention to the blurred distinction between politics and love stating that; 'Othello prefers to conduct his political relationships in the older language of loyalty and loving service." This in turn makes his speech 'an interesting mix of political and sexual discourse' that reveal 'the politicised nature of 'love,''
State conflicts mirror those between characters. Conflicting reports of the Turkish army act as a metaphor for deception and betrayal on different levels; 'tis a pageant/ to keep us in false gaze." The political conflict between two cultures is internalised within Othello as he is torn between Christianity and his Islamic origins. There are opposing geographical and symbolic differences between Venice and Cyprus. Venice characterises civilised order and authority, whereas Cyprus represents dangerous passionate impulse, making Othello an outsider in Venice, but a powerful hero in Cyprus. Shakespeare questions the assumptions and politics upon which Elizabethan society was founded through his portrayal of the Venetian state. Both were supposedly colour blind, which makes the audience question whether is race a political issue. Dollimore supports this asserting that; 'no cultural practise is ever without political significance." In embodying earlier insults, Othello tragically loses his battle against his interpolated role as a black barbarian, describing himself as a 'base Indian." Sinfeild believes that 'the civilised and the barbaric are not very different.. maintaining the distinction is a constant ideological task.' Contradictory racial tensions overshadow political and domestic action.
Tennenhouse believes politics and gender are inter-linked;
Shakespeare's ambivalence towards women leads me to agree with Eagleton's that; 'The woman is a constantly travestied text, perpetually open to misreading." Desdemona's duality makes her a problematic figure as she is both 'half the wooer' Tennenhouse interprets her bold rebellion against Brabantio as a 'Jacobean assault on monarchy as she assumes authority over her body...against the will of the patriarch." But to what degree is she rebelling against men when Brabatio's ownership is simply transferred to Othello? The cost of choosing her own partner, is her identity and the independence that allowed her to do so.
Tragedy is inherent in their relationship. Othello's discourse reveals that he sees her as a possession; 'use Desdemona well." Yet, describing her as 'fair warrior' 'Our general's wife is/ now the general' Matheson believes that; 'the domestic sphere is charged.. with displaced energies of state politics which politicises the language of this sphere." Desdemona's 'grace and power' Othello's race and 'alien status' It could therefore be argued that Othello is as much of a victim as Desdemona.
Often misinterpreted as a dramatic mechanism and symbolic counterbalance to 'hellish villain' She is a flawed character and not simply the victim of her own slavish obedience. Her sense of justice is exploited by Iago as;
Desdemona's naivet Her disturbing resignation towards Othello's derogatory abuse is both frustrating and poignant. Eagleton believes;
The murder allows him to re-establish his rightful masculine dominance as he sees himself as a moral avenger of justice;'she must die, else she'll betray more men." Desdemona's tragic surrender destroys her dignity; 'commend me to my kind lord." Her self sacrifice symbolises female oppression. Tennenhouse believes; 'this punishment also points right to the source of the assault upon patriarchy, the woman's political voice." He argues that her murder is politically motivated because Elizabethans believed; 'mutilating the female could somehow correct political corruption.'
In silencing Emilia's proto-feminist wisdom, Shakespeare implies that her controversial opinions are socially unacceptable, yet he implicitly elevates her views by portraying her as sensible and observant. New Historicism argues that Emillia's subversive dissenting voice is contained because the text represents society's dominant ideology, whereas formalist critics view the text within a vacuum. Dusinberrre believes 'Shakespeare saw men and women as equal in a world that declared them unequal." Emilia rejects sexual superiority; 'Have we not affections/ desires for sport?" Her perceptive comic cynicism stems from her relationship with
Iago; 'They are all stomachs.. they eat us hungrily.. They belch us." Emila's view of men is as derogatory and playful as Iago's;'It is their husbands' faults/ If wives do fall." Her unwavering belief in Desdemona empowers her to confront Othello, confirming Matheson's view that she is 'an agent for..political ideals of justice and liberty." Both are murdered because they threaten their husband's masculine identity. Matheson believes that Iago 'exerts a despotic control over his wife's actions and speech... Her plight reflects Iago's virulent misogyny.'
Bianca's dubious reputation, social ranking and commitment to Cassio enervates her, as she is rejected, neglected and belittled. Even the judicious Emillia disparages her, confirming Dusinberrre's claim that 'importance.. turns women against each other rather than against men who injure them." Bianca and Cassio's relationship parallels that of Desdemona and Othello as it too is based on sexual attraction, but Adamson argues that; 'To suppose that Bianca is a foil for Desdemona is to distort and simplify what the play shows." Tennenhouse believes that 'Jacobean drama proves one thing..sexual relationships are always political." Iago's fixation with Desdemona's sexual appetite leads him to;
Desdemona's bold assertion of her sexual rights, leads me to agree with Tennenhouse that; 'In
desiring a male, she embodies male desire. Thus the female becomes monstrous by virtue of containing male parts.'
Iago, like Othello is afflicted by a paranoid obsessive sexual jealousy desiring to be 'evened with him wife for wife." Masculine tensions permeate the play and Matheson believes; 'The play offers an analysis of male identity within the army as profoundly dependant on place." Iago's feeling of emasculation having not being promoted, leads him to embellish the threat of Cassio's potent sexual power. Dusinberrre believes that; 'Imagining himself wronged, Othello feels his identity as a man of action dissolve." Men dominate the play, but aren't portrayed as well as women, as they are murderous, week and vengeful. The most powerful male character is the embodiment of evil.
Iago manipulates characters and language through his verbal artistry and suggestive punning. Othello's disturbing admiration for Iago becomes apparent when he claims; 'Iago..thou teachest me." Frightening similarities emerge between them as they share a linguistic register, alluding to animals and sexual instincts. Othello's simultaneous linguistic and physical collapse accompanies his decent into frenzied incoherent prose, whilst paradoxically, Iago becomes increasingly poetic, stealing both his style and dignity. Othello's name disintegrates into a series of 'O''s; 'O ill-starred wench!" This formalist examination of structure and language represents a more scientific approach to literature. Here, skilful form makes good literature. American New Critics valued works that promoted unity of form and content, and therefore regard the way the text disrupts and questions itself as a negative feature. Iago's calm eloquence allows him to communicate more effectively with Othello than
Desdemona does. Iago and Othello kneel in a parody of a marriage ceremony that provides an ironic contrast to when Desdemona kneels to proclaim her fidelity. Collocations relating to marriage such as 'witness,'
Shakespeare adheres to the conventions of tragedy, but manipulates and widens its limitations which inevitably effects his portrayal of politics and gender. The play therefore encompasses the values of the Renaissance, allowing Shakespeare to explore topical issues in a less restricted manner. Conventional and modernistic tragedy overlap thus reflecting the indivisible nature of gender and politics in the play. Shakespeare changed the definition of tragedy and what is tragic, thus allowing us to 'participate fully in the horror which falls upon Othello, while we are.. seconded in our faith in divine order,' which is 'essence of tragedy.'