Internationalizing and expanding has become an integral part of multinational organisations with many implications on their strategies. Businesses strive for survival, growth and profitability (Zhao & Merna, 1992). This is also true for the Lakeside Group (see Appendix A) which, expanding into the Kenyan market, developed a market entry strategy (Guethling, 2004 and Appendix B) focusing on an ethnocentric approach with high levels of standardisation throughout the Group. Its first unit in Africa will be a hotel at the Malindi beach in Kenya targeting its loyal wealthy European customer base. High individual service and luxurious facilities shall exceed customers' expectations while these discover the Kenyan culture (see Appendix I for positioning on Lashley's model of service offer).
Under consideration of the Group's origin and the business environment in Kenya, the management has to design a HR strategy which ensures a consistent level of quality in order to highly satisfy customers and the Groups financial goals. People are the key assets in service industries (Storey and Sisson, 1993:1) while often providing a competitive edge (Lashley & McGoldrick, 1994:25). Within the hospitality industry organisations have to tackle problems which are somehow different compared to other branches (Mullins, 1995) due to services and products which frequently are intangible, perishable, heterogenic, simultaneously produced and consumed, and inseparable (Korczynski, 2002:5, and Mullins, 1995:7). It is therefore imperative that a strategy is going to be developed which not only ensures organisational success but also satisfies employees' and customers' needs. The following report thus reviews the business environment under consideration of geo-graphical and cultural factors influencing people management approaches. Subsequent recommendations and justifications of appropriate people management strategies are outlined including a strategic orientation as well as procedures and policies for resourcing, rewarding, training and equal opportunities and diversity issues.
Managers often have neglected the external business environment a business operates in focusing only on internal functions (Go et al, 1992). The industry is vulnerable to a variety of economic, ecological, geopolitical and meteorological factors, and over-reliance on it can be dangerous for a country. Events of this kind represent the extremes of a recurrent uncertainty in an industry which is characterized by the seasonal nature of many of its activities and by important fluctuations even during normal periods (ILO, 2001b). The following text will examine Kenya's business environment regarding the development of suitable HR strategies.
Kenya is seen as a tourism country with 5.6% of GDP derived from a fast growing (10.9% in 2000) tourism industry (ILO, 2001b:10) which demands for a human resource strategy which considers a most likely increase in staff needs in future. This and the factors seen above shape the structure of the tourism labour force, subsequently making it difficult to maintain high permanent staffing levels. There is a generic tendency to operate on the basis of a core staff and to employ the labour needed for day-to-day operations under atypical contractual arrangements (ILO, 2001b). The design of an ideal strategy to perform effectively hence is "a daunting task" (Langton et al, 1992:31) and needs to be controlled and monitored continuously in order to stay ahead of environmental changes. Furthermore, it is important to incorporate local community as much as possible so that locals have a positive view of tourism and in order to gain their support (ILO, 2001b) even though this might create difficulties and obstacles (Kibicho, 2003). This will be done as stated in the Group's mission statement.
Some of the assumptions this report is based on such as Hofstede's cultural dimensions are heavily criticized (Nyambegera, 2000; Pizam et al., 1997; and Cray & Mallory, 1997). Due to the scope of the report however, the author cannot go deeper into this discussion. Furthermore the author is biased due to a strong belief in HRM models, valuing people and proactively taking care of their well-being. This might have influenced the decision making process on which approaches to use for the Lakeside Group.
In general however, Kenya has a huge potential for the future. Political change alongside with, although slow but steady, improvement of economy and the rich resources of people and nature the country has will make life better in a yet so called Third World country. International investments and job developments will help the population to improve their status quo. Organisations however, have to bear in mind the social and cultural environment they operate in.
The design of human resource strategies has to integrate local community and their well-being in order to receive not only governmental support but also collaboration of groups and of each individual. Expatriates will only succeed when equipped with cultural sensitivity alongside with technical skills and knowledge. This is the task of organisations to train, motivate and to support their staff.
Regarding development of HCN's the author suggests close cooperation with schools and universities, following best practice examples such as Marriott or Hilton hotels in order to get the most out of their staff and to gain a high reputation within the country. The Lakeside Group hence could proof that it is dedicated to perform better than industry in general as identified by Price (1994). To sum up, there are  "no universal solutions to organization and management problems" (Hofstede, 2001:373) when organisations expand into new cultures.