Within the five years under investigation, Accor adapted to its environment as well as it aimed to manipulate where possible. The fast changing environment forced Accor to follow and form trends in technology as well as in service standards and procedures. Due to increasing customer sophistication (Stone in HospitalityNet, 2003), Accor followed its competitors in offering lowest price guarantees through its corporate websites, the websites itself emerging by adaptation. Accorhotels.com has been developed late after Marriott, Hilton and Starwood set up their online portals (O'Connor, 2001). Enormous success, however, has been identified (Datamonitor, 2004, and Koumelis, 2005).
More important, however, is the extent of manipulation of the competitive environment through Accor's leadership. In 2001, Accor launched Suitehotels, a new brand focusing on business travellers (Hospitality Net, 2001). Specialising in the business sector, hence integrating all special needs of the business customer segment, disrupted the market (D'Aveni, 1995).
No reaction of competitors has been identified. This might be due to the downturn of economy after September 11 th, and decreasing arrivals of business customers.
In addition, Accor's aggressive growth and development strategy in Europe can be seen as disruptive, especially in the light of economic downturn. Taking up the opportunity to increase leadership in the European market (Espalioux in Matlack & Cohn, 2003), prepares Accor for future growth and stability, once economy recovers. This is true especially for the budget sector, which is not as sensible to economic changes as mid-scale and luxury brands (Matlack & Cohn, 2003).
A major change in the competitive environment has been provoked by Accor, emphasising a 'green' approach. Accor's holistic model of environmental policy (TOI, 2001) has been marketed strongly. Increasing brand awareness and customer perception alongside with Accor's cooperation with national and international bodies (Bohdanowicz and Martinac, 2003) had a 'ripple effect' on competitors as well as firms outside the sector, too (Kassinis & Soteriou, 2003). As environmental hospitality is seen to grow in future (Enz & Siguaw, 1999) competitors adapt and integrate 'green' policies into their strategies. No evidence though has been found that InterContinental Hotels adapted or implemented an environmental model yet.
Hospitality firms have recognized the significance of information technology (IT) for competitive business strategies (Armijos et al., 2002). Hospitality firms however did not use IT innovations effectively yet (Brown and Stange, 2002). Wireless LAN nevertheless increased in importance throughout the last years (Stallings, 2002). Mariott in 2002 was one of the pioneers integrating wireless LAN in the UK (Clark, 2004). From a European point of view, Accor adapted to its environment, however, Accor was the first organisation to implement wireless LAN in France in its Formula 1 and Sofitel brands (Datamonitor, 2004). Accor therefore disturbed the French market through differentiation. Competitors, hence, had to adapt rapidly. Concluding, one can say that Accor in general belongs to the pioneers, aiming to manipulate the market and to confirm its European leadership (MKG Consulting, 2005).
Based on the critical success factors and on the space of possibilities identified in Carpenteral. (2005), Accor's business strategy will be built on three pillars: continuous growth in line with profitability (see Appendix A), stakeholder satisfaction (see Appendix B), and environmental protection (see also Appendix C). Accor will continue its strategy of dominance (Gause, 1964) through diversification, product and market development, and market penetration (Ansoff, 1965). Alliances with travel intermediaries and external organisations will further support the firm to remain competitive and in control of the market.
Accor will maintain its culture of risk and continue to expand aggressively into new European markets. Although the economy has not yet regained its power, low brand penetration enables firms to expand into the European market (Altinay & Altinay, 2003). The focus will differ for Eastern and Western Europe due to the reasons identified in Carpenteral. (2005). This expansion will go in line with heavy branding and marketing of environmental sustainability.
Exploiting existing products parallel to exploration of new ideas will ensure a competitive edge. Customers have to be involved in design and development stages. Prompt deployment of new technology is paramount for success and surprise (D'Aveni, 1995). A combination of 'clockware' and 'swarmware' approach (Bonabeau & Meyer, 2001), along with trained and empowered multi-skilled units experimenting in different market segments, will raise new ideas. Innovations have to satisfy two requirements: profitability and to exceed customer expectations. If satisfied, units have to call for reasonable resources needed to implement the new ideas. Continuous new ideas and changes in the service offer will disrupt the market and challenge competitors.
New ideas and innovations will also arise through generative relationships (Lane & Maxfield, 1996), i.e. with IT professionals and other external organisations. Connecting external and internal forces will add new value to the products and services, hence, improve quality standards (Kim and Oh, 2004). There are no sustainable advantages in a hypercompetitive environment (D'Aveni, 1995). Accor will follow a delayered strategy of "sense and respond ... to propagate(s) wildly before mimicry of competition sets in" (Meyer & Davis, 2003:143). Continuous market research by Accor and external agencies will ensure an objective analysis of the market, its needs and potential.
Market disruption will be ensured through several methods. Focus on all four strategies outlined by Ansoff (1965) will make it more difficult for competitors to adapt. Identification of trends at an early stage and constant communication between stakeholders will facilitate product development and innovation. Concurrent experimentation at different levels and with different products and services and regular announcements of developments and deployments of new products will add extra pressure on competitors.
In applying complexity theory to Accor's strategy the company will not only obtain a competitive edge, but also ensure consistent and continuous internal change. Few simple rules, horizontal and vertical connectivity as well as external observation and cooperation provide a solid base for future growth and development of the firm. Parallel focus on 'swarmware' and 'clockware' approach will drive the firm towards the edge of chaos, enhancing creativity and innovation while standardised operations ensure high quality levels of customer service.