The first meeting of Marx and Engels in Paris in 1844 marked the starting point of a legendary friendship and cooperation of two thinkers
As the Marx placed all history in terms of classes struggling through their relation to material welfare and the means of production. As atheistic followers of Hegel, Marx and Engels thus came to believe that 'the struggle against existing wrong and prevalent evil, is also rooted in the universal law of eternal development'.
Marx and Engels lived at a time in which rapid industrialisation brought about exceeding disparities between the property-owning class (the bourgeoisie) and the working class (the proletariat). Believing capitalism to be only another step toward a society without class antagonisms, Marx turned to studying history and economics, while Engels in 1845 published In this work, Engels drew from direct experience and a wide range of sources, arguing that the working class was becoming increasingly conscious of its place and relation to the bourgeoisie, which would in the end inevitably lead to a proletarian revolution.
From circumstance and experience, Marx and Engels were not so much concerned with democracy, but rather with the greater concept of freedom and creating a freer society, in which, they argued, the state would cease to be necessary. Moreover, by separating the government from civil society, 'the bourgeois state and its attendant ideas of political rights and common national interests functioned, like religion, as an opium, an illusory compensation and thus a support for the injustices of civil society'. In their own words 'Not criticism but revolution is the driving force of history'.
Marx and Engels became convinced that they had discovered a scientific model of society and its inevitable future. Marx's drive to act upon theory soon brought him into international communist circles. After heated debate at a congress in London in 1847, Marx and Engels were commissioned to write a political programme for the Communist League. Its result, the
If this scenario were to be the inevitable course of events, the logical question would be: why? Analysing history, Marx and Engels had discovered a continuous struggle for power between a powerful minority and a weak majority. They noted that 'All previous historical movements were movements of minorities, or in the interest of minorities'. However, it seemed that the proletariat would be able to break through this tendency. 'The proletarian movement is the self-conscious, independent movement of the immense majority, in the interest of the immense majority' In this sense, it can be argued that for Marx and Engels, a primitive idea of democratic, or majority, rights served to justify a complex social theory of inevitable revolutionary struggle. Convinced about the power and improvement value of the theory of class struggle, 'His [Engels'] and Marx's historical vision was optimistic about the future, tragic when it turned to the past, as a record so dreadfully bad that any sacrifice was worth while to get away from it'.
When Lenin became leader of the Bolsheviks in the early twentieth century, a debate among Marxists had been around for nearly fifteen years concerning the best way to bring about communism. One section of the Second International of 1889, under the leadership of Bernstein, had come to embrace the idea of social democracy, and of participation in parliamentary politics. Where Marx had been careful in his wording, or more abstract in his discussion of the democracy question, Lenin was more articulate in his discussion of the matter. He briefly defined the state as 'a special organization of force: it is an organization of violence for the suppression of some class'.
In 1905 Lenin wrote In this article he advocated a 'revolutionary democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry', What contrasted the Bolsheviks from the anarchists, Lenin argued, was that Bolsheviks thought it necessary to establish a transitory government to place the proletariat firm in the seat of power. However, months before the October revolution, in April 1917, he wrote that this would be 'a state Eventually, in Engels' words, the government would slowly 'wither away' because it would become unnecessary.
Some of Lenin's writing, though, already revealed some of the authoritarian traces that were to characterise the Bolsheviks' policy and the Soviet Union's later political development. Convinced, like Marx, of the inevitability of a proletarian revolution, he remarked: 'I said that there
By 1917, Lenin observed that the key conditions were fulfilled in Russia for a proletarian revolution to take place. An imperialist war was raging over Europe, according to Marxist theory calling in the culmination of capitalism. 'We have existing side by side, together, simultaneously, He adopted Trotsky's idea of 'permanent revolution', arguing that the proletariat could not stop after overthrowing the bourgeois government. By not completing the dictatorship of the proletariat, the government itself had gone over to the side of the bourgeoisie.
In practice, much of Lenin's writing at the dawn of the October revolution appears to excuse the Bolsheviks' grasp for power and subsequent policy. Eventually, Bolshevik rule directly after the revolution proved to be highly undemocratic. In 1918, all political parties that did not support the Bolsheviks were systematically suppressed; 'The negative, the tearing down, can be decreed; the building up, the positive cannot', she argued. According to her, Lenin was standing in the way of a democratic learning process of the proletariat. 'The broadest democracy was needed', otherwise 'socialism will be decreed from behind a few official desks by a dozen intellectuals'.
By 1921, Lenin described the Soviet Union as 'a workers' state with bureaucratic distortion'.
It is hard to place Stalin's policy in an unmitigated Marxist light. Despite its rhetoric, the Soviet Union of Stalin appeared to many something other than socialism. The state did not wither away, instead, a status quo of power was developing; one in which all lines came together in Moscow. An elite of scientifically based professional revolutionaries would 'show the way, formulating the program and policies, educating the people, and working out the strategy and tactics'. Stalin's biographer, Deutscher, wrote: 'It has assumed office as a government of the people, by the people and for the people [...][now,] it ceases to be government by the people'. Moreover, they revealed a highly undemocratic and unrepresentative government that stood separate from the masses.
The approximately hundred-year period over which the intellectual and political activity of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin spread has seen the emergence of an immense social and political experiment of revolution and the move toward a communist state. The concept of democracy has over this time been much debated and scrutinised in order to deprive it of its 'bourgeois' elements. However, in the theories of Marx and Engels, there has been too little space left open for a pluralistic approach to state organisation. Communism, or some pure form of democracy within society's organisation has never been achieved.