The marketing campaign has two target audiences:
Host - resident of England, including local resident, who live within about half an hour's drive from the site; regional residents, who live from a distance of two hours' driving or more, make day visits away from home
Overseas VFRs from North America and Europe, 25-34, VF/VR/VFVR, VFR is not the sole purpose of travel but a travel activity.
To build a image of the Houses are treasures of England and make local residents to be proud of
To increase the frequency of local visits, by 10% in tourist number in one year time
To increase visits of host and VFRs to different Treasure Houses through the Treasure House of England joint promotion programme
To improve the communication between oversea visitor's by Internet and motive their VFR trip to visit
To build the database of local residents and reach more oversea VFR visitors via host
For VFR purposes, oversea visits to England (excluding London 42%) accounts for 49% of the total number in the UK (VisitBritain, 2003). Thus, strategic objectives of the campaign are primarily to encourage visits from host and VFRs in England to the Treasure Houses, at the same time help the Treasure Houses capture this niche VFR market.
Beioley (1997) recommended that active promotion to local residents is a way to gain VFR visitors to attraction and Poriaal. (2003) pointed out that people are more likely to visit a heritage site again if their emotional experiences were involved. Thus, in this campaign, the key is to create emotional ties between attractions and visitors.
The strategy is to enhance emotional bond between hosts and treasure houses; the other one is to create emotional ties between VFR visitors and treasure houses through hosts. "From Home to Home" - It has two meanings: to host, be advocate of their local houses, see it as their own home; to VFRs, they leave home to home in England, and then visit 'home of the great families' - the Treasure Houses of England. It creates a sweet perception to VFR trip and visit.
With a theme 'from home to home', marketing activities will be conducted from the aspects of product, pricing, distribution and communication mix.
The financial objective is to both catch the attention of local residents and raise awareness of oversea potential visitors by using budget sensibly. The details of each cost are in the following table and it goes along with each activities. Total cost is within the budget, and allowing for a contingency cost.
This campaign runs from 1 st May 2005 - 30 th April 2006 and the progress can be seen in Appendix. Website communicates directly with oversea visitors and goes through the campaign, as well as web newsletters. Local communication tools are used extensively to catch attention at the beginning for 10 and 20 days. Radio advertising will be dripping during the whole campaign. As audiences get awareness, the PR campaign will take place in June 05. To keep the trend, there is the sales promotion from the ten houses lasting for 3 months. In August and October 05, local newspapers promote visits before some houses close in October; and March 06 announce reopen. Direct mails are sent in summer and before Christmas as the best time for VFR trip.
The campaign begins with diagnosis. Treasure houses need to identify problems first by themselves, given the problem to marketing research manager to conduct a research to analyze problem in its current business environment. Before conducting campaign, financial manager need to figure out how much budget is available for the campaign. An advertising agency will be chosen to work with. Treasure Houses communicate objectives with account manager. The agency will be responsible for creating ideas, media purchasing, advertising production etc for advertising campaign. Local journalist of each house is invited to write press release for PR, and VisitBritain offers help for PR. Production.
The result of a marketing campaign is expected to achieve objectives, in terms of effectiveness, efficiency and economy (Pender, 1999). First of all, the total number of visits can be measured by ticket sales. The number of repeated locals is hoped to get by database built during campaign. Other indicators such as annual pass, special local offer may be able to recognize host group. Secondly, qualitative research is needed. Questionnaires can be designed to investigate the media effect. To existing visitors, they are distributed very simple questionnaires that focus on the purpose of visits, communication channel and frequency of visits. To potential visitors communicated through Internet can be assessed by sending email questions checking their intentions to come. Besides newspaper and radios, focus group can be applied to evaluate the result of PR. Thirdly, concerning sales promotion, consumer's sales response to joint promotion can be measured from flow of booking, enquiry and ticket sale; it also requires comparison of figures before and after a campaign. Finally, it is very necessary to check actions of competitors and any other environmental factors that may influence the outcomes (Pickton and Broderick, 2005)