There's a saying: Xiao Tze, they are either in Lijiang or on the way to Lijiang (Tianjiao, 2002). Recently, the trend of Xiao Tze visiting Lijiang becomes more and more popular in China. Lijiang is named as 'Paradise of Xiao Tze' and regarded as the most typical Xiao Tze destination by public (Seven years itch of Lijiang, no date). It is really interesting to find out the reason behind this noticeable societal phenomenon, especially for Lijiang Tourism Bureau manager. They should learn why Lijiang and Xiao Tze are bonded and take this opportunity to better understand their characteristic customers, satisfy them, facilitate tourism industry and finally benefit Lijiang tourism industry.
This essay begins by introducing the consumer group and the tourism destination. Then marketing segmentation is used to analyze the tourist characteristics and the framework of Purchase-Consumption System Model (Woodside and King, 2001) is applied to explain consumer behaviour in leisure travel. During discussion, a series of recommendations is presented to Tourism Bureau manager. Let us begin with the two 'leading actors': Xiao Tze and Lijiang.
Xiao Tze is a very popular term used in Chinese society nowadays. It represents a newly emerged lifestyle that no academic literature has discussed ever. Given the remarkable tendency, the topic was raised by newspapers, magazines and such publications. For example, the behaviour of Xiao Tze is discussed in a 'comic sociology' - Various facets of the life of Xiao Tze (2001) by People's Daily Newspaper Online (a large Chinese publication) in Reading Section of their website. It gives a comprehensive description of Xiao Tze. Accordingly, Xiao Tze are people around 25-35; well-educated, most have studied overseas and been influenced by western culture. They live in big cities such as Beijing, Shanghai; have stable job with secure income. They work hard and know how to enjoy life using disposable income and time. Even though they are not wealthy, they are not hesitated to spend money in things they really like, such as travel. Most of them are web surfer, so Internet is a necessity in their life for keeping touch with friends, searching information etc. Like the American 'Yuppie' of the 1980s was defined by Rolex Watch, Gucci briefcase (Solomon, 1994), Xiao Tze define themselves by certain ways. For example, using brand products such as LV bags; having 'elegant' interests, such as watching classic films.
It is difficult to say how this lifestyle has come out; however, it is not a unique phenomenon so far. In 2000, a similar group 'Bobos' was heralded by an American journalist David Brooks in his book - BoBos in Paradise: The New Upper Class and How They Got There. David named the new upper class 'Bourgeois Bohemians' that mixed '60s-style liberalism' with '80s-style conspicuous consumption'. (Brooks, 2000) The Bobos is quite similar to Chinese Xiao Tze, when west meets east, Chinese 'Bourgeois Bohemians' are what we see now - Xiao Tze.
Lijiang is a famous tourist destination for five main attractions: Jade Dragon Snow Mountain, Tiger Leaping Gorge, The First Bend of the Yangtze, The Baisha Murals and The Ancient Town of Lijiang. Especially the old town, which was named as a World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1997, is the ancient capital of the Naxi people who have a long history and rich cultural heritage, in terms of Dongba music, script, architecture and clothes.
Lijiang is 'a dreaming garden for people longing for a haven of peace different from today's modern cities'. (Ancient City of Lijiang, 2004). People who have visited give comments like this: "Lijiang seems to have a magic power to attract me there; I will never be tired of it." "A short stay in Lijiang refreshed my spirit and gave me new vigor to everyday life." "Tired of city life's hustle and bustle, I especially love the peace and quiet of Lijiang." "Naxi people and their Dongba culture, the strong cultural atmosphere makes Lijiang special." (Sina travel forum, no date)
Tourism in Lijiang has developed quickly in recent years and a dramatic increase in domestic tourism contributes to 93-96% of tourists to Lijiang. (Duang, 2000) Today, tourism has replaced agricultural industry become the backbone of Lijiang local economy. And the output of culture tourism occupies a big amount of the total tourism income (Wu, 2003). Needless to say, tourists are economic source of Lijiang, and the performance of destination manager directly leads the development of local economy.
Berry et.al (1991; cited in Bieger and Laesser, 2002, p68) emphasized the importance of marketing segmentation as a helpful tool in developing marketing strategy. By dividing the market and grouping consumer with same characteristics in terms of needs and wants, marketing segmentation helps manager to identify customers' need and want to meet their expectation. (Middleton and Clarke, 2001) There are different variables of categorization. Kotler (1994) summarized four main variables in terms of geographical, socio-economic, psychographic and behavioural for generic market segmentation. In tourism market, seven ways are defined by Middleton and Clarke (2001), which are purpose of travel; buyer needs, motivations, and benefits sought; buyer behaviour/characteristics of product usage; demographic, economic, and geographic profile; psychographic profile; geodemographic profile; and price.
In this study, the tourist segment is mainly based on tourist psychographic profile. Given each method has both strengths and weaknesses and many authors suggest using more methods in order to predict tourist consumer behaviour accurately. (Robinson, 2000; Middleton and Clarke, 2001) Some other variables will also be considered. As there's no primary research for this specific tourist segment, statistics of Xiao Tze cannot be provided here. Therefore, their characteristics are summarised from Various facets of the life of Xiao Tze.
The use of Purchase-Consumption System (PCS) in travel and tourism enhances understanding of travel behaviour before, during and after trip, as well as the relationship of variables involved in the three stages (Woodside and King, 2001). This model is chosen because it involves tourists' consumption behaviour during trip, which is not noted in other models. Given that tourism is the backbone of Lijiang economy, tourists' spending behaviour during trip that gives directly benefit to local economy must interest tourism manager.
There are 19 variables (V) in the model, including 8 personal and environmental factors in pre-trip stage (BOX 1), which influence decision making and planning before and during trip; 8 variables in during-trip stage (BOX 2), which are the elements formed a trip; 3 variables in post-trip stage (BOX 3), which are the outcomes of the experiences and influence future travel. The three stages are interactive, BOX 1 decision triggers BOX 2, the experience in BOX 2 results evaluatioin and satisfactin in BOX 3, finally evaluation becomes an important personal influence in BOX 1.
Woodside and King (2001) believe a relevant theoretical construct in this model is image. It plays a significant role in influencing tourist destination choice (Beerli and Martin, 2004) and Baloglu and McCleary (1999) pointed out overall that image of a place is formed by cognitive and affective evaluations and dependent upon individual attributes. Additionally, information source and socio-psychological motives are found to be two important components in building a destination image. Information source emphasizes cognitive evaluation and socio-psychological motive is related to affective attributes of image. Furthermore, perceived image after visit influences satisfaction and intention to repeat the visit, which depends on if destination can fit the image customer perceived and meet their expectation. (Chon, 1990; cited in Beerli and Martin, 2004, p623)
Associated with motivation, psychological characteristics, destination image and information source, Xiao Tze travel behaviour is better understood during discussion using marketing segmentation and PCS as tools. The last recommendation is to conduct a primary research of 'characteristic customer' because Xiao Tze and Lijiang are strongly bonded.