Information Communication Technology's (ICT) application into tourism has revolutionized the industry since 1950s; nowadays, the rapid development of Internet and computerized systems promote the change and become a key force. Nowadays, ICT has changed tourism industry structure all around the world (Ma et al., 2003), especially in distribution, whose initial purposes is 'information, combination and travel arrangement services' defined by Buhalis (2003). Computerized Reservation System (CRS), Global Distribution System (GDS), and Internet, all of them play significant roles in facilitating tourism distribution.
Today travel becomes one of the most popular products sold over the internet (O'Connor, 2001). Facing the trend, this essay is going to explore tourism distribution channels on the Internet. It begins with a literature review of electronic distribution in travel and tourism industry from different angles. The essay chooses and evaluates three different distribution channels on Internet from consumer perspective. Based on the consumer's experience, it sets out to discuss those implications from organisation perspective. It is aimed to provide valuable recommendations for tourism organisations at the end.
To provide information and to facilitate customer purchase are two main functions of distribution (Bowie & Buttle, 2004). Services and information are delivered by various distribution channels to match information to the right consumers, time and place (Go and Pine, 1995). Besides, distribution is also one of the most important marketing strategies and the largest cost in the marketing budget (Buhalis, 2003). In tourism industry, distribution channels are made up from principals, intermediaries and consumers. Some examples are shown below.
From the adoption of CRS from airline industry in 1950s, conversion to GDS in 1980s, tourism organisations use ICT as an important tool to exchange information, deliver reservation and communicate with customers. Particularly today World Wide Web offers industries unique opportunities (MacDonald, 1997) and enables principals to communicate directly to consumers via their own website (Carroll & Siguaw, 2003). Consequently, principals benefit from cost reduction, revenue growth, more efficient and effective marketing search, database development, and customer retention (Morrison et. al, 1999).
However, it changes the relationships between principal and intermediary (Bowie & Buttle, 2004). Intermediaries, who are third parties between principals and final consumers, deliver information and assists purchase (Middleton & Clarke, 2001). Nowadays GDSs is treated as 'traditional eTourism eMediaries' and challenged by new eTourism eMediaries - Web agents (Buhalis, 2003).
Disintermediation and re-intermediation are two issues raised by Internet together with the emergence of ecommerce model (Ma et al., 2003). Disintermediation is the elimination of intermediaries, for example, hotels cut off travel agencies and sell directly to consumers via their own websites. It is believed that ED would replace traditional distribution channels (Buhalis, 1998), especially from its key force - Internet (Inkpen, 1998), traditional travel agencies will disappear and a new kind of organisation will be formed with new products and new business models (Bloch and Segev, 1997). However, O'Connor (1999) argues travel agencies are good at searching and packaging loads of information into valuable advice to customers, so that their role is getting more important. This is a controversial topic with many arguments.
At the same time, new channels are structured on Internet. Since Internet decreases the entrant barriers, new players enter and provide new added-value services, such as new Web travel agent Expedia. To survive, old intermediaries chase the trend and build their website on Internet as well, for example, Travelocity is a portal website of Sabre. In sum, new online assistants are needed for online sellers to reach customers, provide added value and generate revenue, all of these contribute to the phenomena of re-intermediation (Turban & King, 2003).
Some consumers prefer intermediaries, some like buying from principal directly. No matter how the things change, Internet shifts the bargaining power to end users and reduces the switching costs (Porter, 2001); so the ultimate winner is always the consumers (Financial Time, 1998). In the next section, 'the winner' is going to choose some travel products via three Internet distribution channels; and the evaluation of each channel is discussed afterward.
The section introduces and reviews important elements involved in distribution channel for further evaluation.
The next page is results of evaluation and comparison, all the factors and feedbacks are listed in the Table. To sum up the purchase experience from customer's view, travel agency is the easiest way to book and Hotels.com possibly is the final choice. (To page 13)
(Continue page 10) Because customers spend the least time but get the best price. Hotels.com delivered their 'best rate guarantee', which gains customers' trust, so that it is very possible that customers would shop with them again. As a travel aggregator, Travelocity doesn't fulfill the value proposition of optimum selection and convenience, especially for the park ticket problem. Besides, there're some other flaws in their vacation package. For example, airlines in 'flight + hotel' package are very limited and customer cannot choose the best one.
Compare with the other two channels, booking with principals is time-consuming. However, consumers cannot get a lower rate if buy directly from them. Disney World is the destination principal, by using differentiated park ticket as a strategy; it attracts customers to book Walt Disney World Resort Hotels. Apart from packaging hotel and park ticket, Disney also tries to add air and ground transportation into their package. However, it doesn't work well at the moment, because searching a flight or car in Disney Website takes such a long time and sometimes ends up with no result (especially for car hire).
Even though website design is satisfactory on average, consumer feels the booking process is too mechanistic and lack of social presence. About security issues, without reminding consumer is not likely to check privacy seal or any security guarantee. Even though terms and conditions are listed before purchase, it is rarely read by consumers.
Regarded as one of the most important and successful distribution channels, Internet enables consumers to search travel products, compare prices, make reservation and purchase (Collins et al., 2003). In the near future, Internet is continuing to be prime channel for travel products and can generate greater services expectation. More consumers will trust Internet and shop online (Buhalis & Licata, 2002). In such a dynamic competitive environment, it is a must for principals and intermediaries to improve themselves, gain competitive advantages and win customers. Referring from customer experience, the essay is going to discuss implications in the following part and recommendations are provided to intermediaries, principals and all organisations at the end.
When doing business on the Internet, the only assumed constant is change.
In future, distribution models are more complex, multi-dimensional, open and flexible (O'Connor, 2004). 'Faster, better and innovative service' is needed for all organisations (Tapscott, 2000). No matter principals or intermediaries, who can adapt to the dynamic world quickly and flexibly who will be the winner.