It is based on the upmarket Italian In a similar manner to the Italian publication
Its characteristics include the usual "glossy arra of fashion and lifestyle news accompanied by high-end advertising in the beauty and cosmetic markets" (Media Week, Emap confirms  Emap's partnership with Mondadori Group has guaranteed
 This indicates the targeted consumer for
Emap's consumer research would have 'produced facts about their target consumer' (Blythe, 2001) including their motivations, what they like to spend their money on as well as their spending power and disposable income. It may have also shown the ratio of interest in both fashion and beauty.
Their distribution research will have established where the target consumer is likely to shop for the magazine- what is their lifestyle and where are they likely to live. However, a magazine is not an essential purchase. It is a lifestyle product that needs to be where their target consumers are. They will not travel a long way to a specialist outlet on a weekly basis just to buy a product such as this.
For promotional research Emap could have used their other established magazines' databases to asses the effect of different forms of media promotion such as television and radio advertising.
Product research would have identified the niche product requirement by looking for gaps in the market not being served by the product content of other existing magazines.
Some of the secondary research would have been relatively quick and cheap because Emap already has existing successful magazines, which have factual data on what sells magazines. Expert analysis of the data already existing on Emap's companies records would have turned it into usable information; 'raw data in itself worthless unless it is manipulated to answer the right questions' (Blyth, 2001).
 As the targeted consumer is a more mature, upmarket woman, the competition for
 Emap's huge investment of However, competition in the women's magazine market is particularly fierce, especially at this time of year. All five main magazine companies are launching a new women's magazine within the first four months of 2005.
The National Magazine Company recently launched 'Reveal' magazine, which is in strong competition with Emap's 'Closer' because they are both a mix of celebrity, lifestyle and television listings. This, however, is no competition for Conde Nast's and Northern & Shell's new launches are both in the monthly market, which is more likely to be competition for
Although a weekly This prediction is based on the recent impact that the new weekly men's magazines 'Nuts' and 'Zoo' had on the sales of 'FHM' and 'Loaded'. "The development of men's weeklies had a profound impact on the monthlies" (Media Week, How 2005 is shaping up as the year of the women reader). Therefore, if
Northern and Shell's 'Happy', recently launched in April, may also have competition from In this case, it seems that 'Happy' and
 All editions to date have brightly coloured lettering with a distinctive celebrity on the cover. By doing this, they are creating a diverse and instantly recognisable brand that stands out amongst the other competition. Those consumers that become brand loyal to
The cover's marketing message is a mix of its weekly content with a new celebrity on the cover each week. This is combined with an extensive celebrity interview inside the magazine as well as articles on the hot buys of the week in accessories, beauty and fashion.
The Chief Executive of Emap has already discovered "there is a very clear understanding about the However, the brand is an established Italian one and therefore needs adaptation to fit the British market. The new brand of If, using the a strategic tool such as the Boston Matrix, it establishes that Emap already have profitable 'stars' and 'cash cows' with good sales figures for 2004 (see appendix)'Heat'(1886,000 copies), 'Closer' (1044,000 copies), and the monthlies 'New Women' (799,000 copies) and 'Top Sante' (426,000 copies). These products are either in the Growth or Maturity stages with successful sales and good profit. This, then, allows Emap to 'invest their profit into a new product that is about to enter the introductory stage' (Naylor, 1999), this being
 However, this does not necessarily mean that it needs to be the cheapest available. In fact, it would be counter-productive because the objective is to attract upmarket consumers. The main tenet of their marketing concept will be that most of their customers are prepared to pay a little more for something that works really well for them. If the product is good value, the reader will remain loyal whereas bad pricing will cause the consumer to look elsewhere. Because This is especially true because it seems most of its competition will be monthlies. Emap therefore needed to be careful in establishing that As the current weekly price of
 It will be Emap's responsibility to make the product widely available in all establishments in which the competitive magazines are sold. If Emap has researched correctly and therefore knows where their potential consumers live within the UK, they may target the highest population regions and focus on achieving more outlets in order to generate higher sales.
 In television and radio campaigns and on posters and billboards (see appendix) .In outlets such as W H Smith, promotional staff handed out free preview issues of
The television advertisements have continued past the launch and have continued to grow in volume since they began on the 11 There are many programmes all aimed at the target consumer that that have carried Most of the airings have been during the daytime television slots.
 They have also advertised
Emap has adopted the use of e-marketing as a form of communications medium. The Emap have produced a website with links to attract attention which will inevitably result in action from the receiver. The use of colourful bold pictures and editing attracts attention resulting in consumers wanting to purchase the product. They have produced a successful balance of enough information to create a desire to know more.
 They have been able to achieve this by using existing internet advertisers such as 'Asos' (see appendix). Through marketing of this kind it means that 'the feeling of communication is taken to a more personal level' (Blythe, 2001). The hyperlink Emap created through the email is extremely informative catching interest immediately with excellent use of interactive options such as watching the television advertisement via their computer. This clever use of e-marketing allows the receiver to be the first to preview the new magazine and all of its content.
There is little evidence to date as to how successful the launch of However, according to editor; Jane Bruton stated in The magazine has also offered readers the opportunity to send letters voicing their opinions on the magazine in order to gage a reaction of their performance. They have also created a Grazia registration (see appendix) allowing access to consumer's personal details.
Evidence of post sales performance advertising did occurred within the first week of its launch as on the 23
When Emap carried out their research for
All companies need a variety of products, which are varying in their product life cycle. 'This theory assumes that changes in the consumer preference go only one way- into decline' (Naylor, 1999).Therefore, from the research undergone it seems From the analysis of the current market, it seems that there is little competition in the niche This provides evidence that Grazia will inevitably do well. However, the monthlies Glamour and Marie Claire, although aimed at a younger market (around 18-25), their price tags of Therefore Grazia must ensure they establish its niche segment to justify its price
However, it seems the biggest competitor for This mixture of Designer and High Street labels is also evident in the beauty sector and 'Vogue' successfully achieves all this in an extensive magazine averaging 400 pages an edition.
Nevertheless, 'Vogue', like with any other monthly, has the advantage of loyal subscribers on a yearly basis. With this, they know they will still sell successfully throughout the year. If not then they would need to reconsider their pricing strategy or follow 'Elle's' example of once being a weekly and now a successful monthly.
.