8 th October 2005,
AMD European Technical Support Centre,
Advanced Micro Devices (UK) Ltd
AMD House
Frimley Business Park
Camberley
SL7 16UG, Surrey
UK
Dear Mr Ruiz,
I am currently doing a BSc Business Information Systems degree (2 nd year) at Oxford Brookes University. I successfully finished my first year of study and am now seeking for a twelve months work placement starting from June 2006 to September 2007. In my researches for a job, I saw your placement offer on Fledglings for a Technical and Commercial Support Engineer. This position directly appealed to me firstly because AMD is a company that I consider as professional and always ahead in Technology terms. Secondly, I have known this company and even used their products (processors) for several years now. I am looking for the opportunity to perform in this capacity for AMD and believe my background and experience will help me be an asset to your company in a very short time.
My work experience has helped me build excellent communication skills, especially with company customers. I am very conscientious about meeting deadlines and completing tasks unsupervised (or supervised). I am also extremely motivated by the opportunity of working with an international processor and flash memory manufacturer as it will allow me to gain an insight into working for an international company. Since the age of eight, I have developed hardware and software skills by building and using computers in my leisure time. This included the use of AMD products such as Duron or Athlon processors. In addition, the skills I developed with my AVCE course and University degree will definitely be an asset for this job opportunity, especially with my business modules (management) which always help when working in teams. I have worked with other people for many courseworks in the past and fluently speak two European languages (French and English).
I am very interested in becoming part of Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. after visiting your company website and reading an article on Wikipedia about AMD's involvement in building the fastest up-to-date processors worldwide. I can be reached at the address, phone number and email below. I look forward to hearing from you on the status of my application.
Sincerely,