Having analysed twelve articles about current issues in the publishing industry, it is clear to see that the last few years have seen some major changes.
The number of new books being published each year is growing. Between January and July 2005, figures saw "an increase of 11% on the same period in 2004"(Alison Bone, The Bookseller, 9/9/2005). Article 8 questions whether the book trade will be able to cope with the amount of new titles being published and suggests that print on demand technology has been a main factor, "It's now so inexpensive to become a publisher" (Michael Healy, The Bookseller, 9/9/2005). So many new authors has effected The Booker Prize making it difficult to cut the long list down to a short list, making it difficult for book sellers to display these titles. During the build up to the announcement, the demand for the shortlist books is noticeable in the rise in sales figures. "the winners expecting sales of at least "tenfold" in the week the winner is announced" (Alison Bone, Bookseller, Issue 5196, 16/September/2005). This year the competition has reach 109 nominations for the prize. According to Robert McCrum (Observer, 2/10/05) "The prize has generated neither excitement nor controversy", seeming to suggest that the competition is now so diverse, it has become a bit dull, but is clearly still important to the industry because of the way it effects sales. Booksellers like Waterstones and Borders have turned to online retail like Amazon and Google Print. Google launched this project in October 2004 with the aim to make every book content available digitally online. Issues have arisen over copyright as talked about in article 4. The Authors Guild demand they want to protect writers interests by suing Google for copyright infringement. In article 3, Google fights back with its talk about security measures against piracy and copyright by disabling the copy and paste function and restricting the number of pages the consumer can move through. But publishers query why Google is requesting full texts, if these restrictions mean the full text is not available in the public domain. Amazons similar project, "Search inside the Book", has booksellers, for example Waterstones, already retailing through them. Waterstones believes " its Amazon tie-up gives a cost effective flexibility" (The Bookseller, 1/7/05), meaning it has the freedom to invest in its high street stores and not just have its capital tied up in one retail outlet. The problem with Amazon and similar online retailers is that they are selling books at discounted prices and undercutting the physical booksellers. They also promote 'used and new' items on the same web page, so the consumer can see a much cheaper used copy of the book at the same time as looking at the new title. The worry is that consumers will opt for the cheaper option, which means that the author and publisher do not receive any payment. From another perspective, an important point is that Amazon gives a quick and straightforward way of finding older titles. This helps with back-list sales, and it can cope with the increase in new titles because it has a limitless amount of pages, unlike the limited amount of display shelves in a bookshop.
Over all, the key issues are based around technology. Print on Demand means capital doesn't have to be tied up in stock, therefore it is more cost effect. But this has a knock on effect, as more publishers emerge. More publishers mean more books and more booksellers struggling to display them. More books also means more competition for The Booker Prize and similar awards which over the next five years looks likely to grow. This may make the Booker Prize seem less important as the increased number of authors dilutes the Booker Prize status. Technological advances mean fast, efficient turn around which pressure booksellers to turn to online retail. Over the next 5 years, the publishing industry looks set to follow the online retail trend.