The aim of this essay is to introduce a general understanding of phylogenetic systematics. It concentrated on demonstrating the principles of constructing a consensus phylogeny tree at a molecular level. The procedures have been discussed including assembling a dataset, aligning sequences, constructing a phylogeny tree and presenting data, as well as how to read a phylogeny tree. It also covered evaluation of some methods and the computational implements involved.
Since Charles Darwin pioneered the concept of systematic hierarchy representing an approximation of evolutionary history, there are more and more attentions have been paid on phylogenetic systematics, a term for identifying and understanding the evolutionary relationships normally due to a gradual populational phenomenon, among all kinds of living things on earth, both extant and extinct. In the evolutionary hierarchy, an evolutionary diversity is regarded at many levels from genes, species, to genera and higher taxon. Unsurprisingly, phylogenetic systematics involves tremendous amount of biological information, (Calow, 1998) which challenges the determination of phylogenetic relationships. Phylogenetics is responsible for seeking minimum evolution and inferring evolutionary history by phylogenetic analysis.
Thanks to the development of computer technologies, it enables biologists to build up electronic databases with enormous storage capacity, share and transmit information through Internet global network, as well as processing and modeling data. The computational efforts have being rapidly extended in biological science, especially in genomics and sequence analysis, and derived an independent scientific discipline called bioinformatics. (Ouzounis and Valencia, 2003) It benefits taxonomic databases for combining taxonomic information systems with computed-assisted quantitative taxonomic analyses clasdistic analysis (Zhong et el., 1999) so that achieve transmission, storage and retrieval of phylogenetic information.
A phylogeny tree is a representation of the evolutionary relationship among a group of genes or organisms. Since genetic resources only accumulate bit by bit and limiting abilities and knowledge heretofore, phylogenetic analysis is always say to reconstruct instead of accomplish a phylogeny tree. The attempt of this essay is to demonstrate the principles of phylogenetic analysis with a variety of different both numerical and computational approaches to construct genealogies at a molecular level rather than species.
Although phylogenetic analysis is widely accepted as a powerful tool for identifying and interpreting molecular data for evolutionary relationship, there are still exist a series of theoretical problems with evolutionary changes between sequences. The recognition has been growing that homology-based methods of functional classification were likely result in systematic errors. The predictions of molecular functions also stayed at relatively low confidence level. It is believed that a number of errors were caused by functional multiplicity of proteins through gene duplication, speciation and other processes. Similarly, the poorly identified mutations in nucleotide sequences were also responsible for arising errors.
Here a feigned case as an example of analyzing two homologous nucleotide sequences is illustrated in figure 7. Recalling the mutations in nucleotides, substitutions may be caused by transitions, transversions, deletions, insertion and inversion. Thereby, the differences can be determined at three nucleotide sites that are marked in figure 7, within the region contain twelve mutations. Thus, it indicated that there could be many more mutations than the ones can be detected. It is not yet be solved by current capability of phylogenetic models.
As Theodosius Dobzhansky quoted, 'Nothing in biology makes sense except in the light of evolution.' (Dobzhansky, 1973) Phylogenetic systematics is regard as a natural and meaningful way to order molecular data. From learning the principles of constructing a phylogeny tree, it enables one have general understanding of phylogenetic systematics, but also the theory of evolution. Phylogeny trees carry an enormous amount of evolutionary information within their branches. In fact, it infers the evolutionary relationship not only between living things, but also genes and genomes. Furthermore, many disparate fields are found relevant to the methods and theories of molecular phylogenetics, too. Correspondingly, some disparate sciences also greatly contribute to the development of phylogenetics, where computer sciences and statistics are the best examples.
At present, difficulties of phylogenetic analysis are mainly come from the reliability of the inference of phylogeny tree due to the resource and the methods, and the limited biological information that phylogenetics is starving for. The prospective developments of genomics and bioinformatics are considered to directly ameliorate phylogenetics.