This essay critically reviews tourism theory by examining and analysing my own travel experiences and aspirations. The assignment addresses tourist typologies, motivations for travel, tourist identity and travel as a sacred experience since these are arguably the most relevant to the travel autobiography. Extracts from the autobiography are used as supporting evidence and as a result of this assessment of tourist behaviour issues, the implications for tourism management are discussed, bearing in mind the limitations of theoretical models.
Tourism is a business dealing in people and experiences and in order that tourists might be sensitively managed, they must be studied. Although it is clearly impossible to determine each individual's motivations or predict outcomes of their travel, theory is useful for identifying general trends.
Despite its brevity, this project demonstrates the complexities of tourist behaviour. More issues influence behaviour than those discussed here, but dealing with them in any detail would require many more pages. However, despite the personal nature of some of the experiences, this introduction to tourist behaviour theory suggests that academics' analysis has often been accurate. Some papers are perhaps more limited in their usefulness (e.g. Cohen, 1972) or contain some questionable ideas (e.g. Boorstin, 1971), but such works still add to the knowledge-base on tourist behaviour and assist the industry in marketing their products to particular groups.
The essay highlights the weakness of theory that, whether concerned with motivations, experience or identity, it does not take a holistic view of an individual's tourism experience. An individual who is denied access to 'back areas' may later, having won the confidence of the hosts, gain access. A 'mass tourist' may on another occasion be Cohen's explorer or even a drifter. As MacCannell, p.602 highlights, a traveller evolves and may cross from one category to another. Even within one trip a traveller may change. Although few authors make specific reference to this issue, Cole (2000: 76) summarises it well:
Seaton (2002: 313) explains, "the modern researcher must constantly be aware of the temporal specificity of the data". Tourists are dynamic individuals with ever changing perceptions, desires, motivations and needs. Tourism theory only functions as a snapshot of one person for one short moment, and a more local, personal view of the individual is needed to fully understand their motivations, desires, expectations and needs.
Furthermore, managing tourism products is to manage 'sacred' products. Tourists do not buy, consume and forget as with other consumers and products. Instead, there are lasting impacts. Given the 'spiritual' element, and the significant risks involved, a poor experience will likely have deeper consequences than a faulty product from another industry, hence it is especially important that tourists' expectations are met. Theory combined with real-life experience from travel biographies may help achieve this.