Scenes of violence are relatively common in film, and contemporary Latin American cinema is no exception. However, the type and grade of violence, and the context in which it is portrayed, differ significantly from one film to the next. It is therefore useful - and arguably necessary - to examine each expression of violence on its own merits and in the context of the film in order to really understand what purpose it serves. Several questions stand out as central to this analysis: What manifestations of violence are shown? How is it used by directors/writers? What effect does the violence have on the viewer? How does it contribute to our understanding of the film's story and characters? How, if at all, does the portrayal of violence in contemporary cinema reflect the realities of modern Latin American society? What societal values/views do the films expose regarding violence?
These are the questions which this essay will deal with, using as case studies three critically acclaimed films from recent years:
While the three films all contain violence, the degree, type and context vary considerably, allowing a good general overview of the related issues and the questions outlined above. Although violence is a key part of each of the stories told in the three films, it is not in itself the main focus; all three films are primarily the stories of people, their experiences and their relationships, allowing us a view of society's reaction to the violence.
Even within just these three films, there is a staggering array of violence in terms of perpetrator, victim and type of aggression: Inter-family and inter-gang feuds ( The role of violence in the three films therefore changes depending on who is the perpetrator and who is the victim, but in all cases it is there to make the audience think about the characters in greater depth, beyond the simplicity of 'good guy' or 'bad guy'. Characters who we are inclined to sympathise with commit similar acts of violence as those who we are less fond of (e.g. Octavio in The reasons for the behaviour become more important than the behaviour itself, and thus excuse it, at least to some degree.
Violence in each of these films is used as a tool to help communicate the beliefs and values of all key characters, rather than as a stigma to attach solely to the less likeable protagonists. Indeed, despite the obvious negative consequences of resorting to violence, the three films repeatedly present aggression as part of a code of honour, a way of gaining respect, as necessary 'street justice' where there is no other real authority. In In each case, the characters prolong the cycle of violence, but see their actions as legitimate in the circumstances.
This portrayal, which only to a limited extent excuses some of the violence, suggests a criticism of society in communities (such as Mexico City and Rio de Janeiro where two of the three the films are set) where violence has to some degree become an omnipresent and accepted part of everyday life. By embroiling likable or vulnerable characters (especially Tonio and Pacu in Given that several victims suffer in situations not of their own making (principally those mentioned above plus Valeria in the second part of Hence, while a kind of measured violence represents justice for some characters, for others there is no justice at all. Even for those of us who watch these films but are not part of the societies they present, the boundaries between the acceptable and the unacceptable become more indistinct and in this way the films ask the viewer to reassess their own values.
The portrayal of violence in Through an understanding of how the violence in each film exposes the beliefs and values of the characters and how it moulds them as the stories progress, issues are raised regarding the legitimacy - or not - of violence in certain situations, the morality and sense of social justice of the individual and of the importance placed on honour and justice in Latin America. This goes well beyond simplistic notions of right or wrong actions and into an examination of tolerable/justifiable evil in the pursuit of a greater good. i.e. the power of the dealers in
The violence in these films therefore has a certain introspective, didactic function; the films invite an analysis of the societies where this violence takes place (whether the violence be entirely fictional [ As such, it provides a catalyst for the discussion or at the very least consideration of related social issues such as poverty, social isolation, We grow to like characters like Pacu & Tonio ( Often this understanding comes through observing and learning from their experiences of violence.
In none of these films is the depiction of violence wanton or uncalculated. Instead, it performs a specific role for the writer and/or director, either introducing a character, evolving that character, or putting events in a meaningful context. The violence itself is not the story, but the background to it; the explanation of who characters are, why they act the way they do and why events occur as they do. For example, in The story though, is one of family honour and asserting one's identity. Similarly, in Although at a first viewing some of the violence in It is We still may not agree with them, but at least we can begin to understand their motivations.
In conclusion then, in contrast to some blockbuster films which could be argued to gratuitously use scenes of violence for sensationalist purposes, these three Latin American films highlight, with very different representations of violence, a common trend: that of using depictions of violence not to dehumanise the victims or the aggressor, but rather to humanise all the characters. Likable characters are the victims As such, the films present credible situations which engage the viewer and encourage a critical analysis (from outside and from within) of the societies which have produced these cyclical and self destructive manifestations of violence.