With three hotels Each unit has its own style and character. Prime locations are in the countryside. These five star hotels house between 25 and 40 guest rooms, four to eight suites, food and beverage facilities and provide various leisure amenities including cultural programmes.
Due to France's location in Europe and its constantly high number of tourist arrivals (WTO 2004) The country is situated in Western Europe and borders on Belgium, Luxembourg, Germany, Switzerland, Italy, Monaco, Andorra and Spain. France offers a great diversity of landscapes including rivers, lakes, coastlines and sea sides, mountain ranges, rural areas and cities. France is a democratic country and has got an economy which is shaped by private enterprises and substantial intervention by the government in key sectors such as transportation and communication that, however, is declining (Whyte 2004).
The French hotel industry comprises nearly 30,000 establishments and can list 1.5 billion overnight stays in 2003. It is the most visited country (Minist Wine tourism is just one area of tourism opportunities in France. The economic potential of this market sector has not been realised for a long time. It has changed, however, since the last years. Wine-related attractions such as wine museums, wine routes or wine tasting have increased. It can be expected that this market sector is growing in future times (Frochot 2000).
According to the WTO (2004) France ranks number one in international tourist arrivals worldwide. The UK including Ireland composes the main foreign source market followed by Germany and the Netherlands. The United States are the major market outside Europe. Those countries, except for the Netherlands, are also leading in international tourism expenditures (see Appendix 8).
Looking at the national market it can be stated that French people favour to spend their holidays in their own country but using budget accommodation or staying with friends rather than using upscale or luxury hotels. Additionally, it seems to emerge a trend to outbound tourism among French holidaymakers (European Travel Commission 2005).
Regarding the development of an ageing population the number of retirees increases and with it the number of potential consumers. As discussed earlier they present a strong target group on which should be focused. According to the European Travel Commission (2004a) they demand products higher in quality and comfort. Therefore, they may be potential customers for the upscale and luxury hotel market.
Due to the high market share of international tourism including expenditures it should be focused on this market sector. Priority should be put on the home market country followed by regional markets with particular regard to leisure tourists. It also needs to be taken into account that the tourism demand can be seasonal, especially outside the urban centres and hence, lower the demand for tourism and hospitality services. Targeting on retirees may remedy it to a certain degree as this group tends to take vacation during off-season periods (ibid).
Marketing research has shown that France is an attractive country to set up further business for a UK hospitality organisation. Although, there are dissimilarities similarities dominate due to the geographical proximity and the EU membership of both countries. Guidelines and legislation overlap in some fields that again facilitate entering the French market. The EU principle of It sets the framework for EU companies to cross borderlines and operate abroad. However, it has to be mentioned, too, that it enforces competition among market players. In addition to that, a common European currency creates a certain price transparency between Euro zone countries which can be evaluated in a positive and negative way at the same time for both service provider and consumer. Therefore, all elements of the marketing mix have to be selected carefully. As the analysis has shown the area around Epernay, Champagne, would be a suitable location for the first unit of Furthermore, the proximity to the key target markets and to Paris could be other advantages. The capital city can be accessed very well from abroad and France in general offers a well-developed transportation and road network which enables tourists from neighbouring states to enter the country and travel around easily whether by train or car.
Even though, there are many statistics available from the different governmental bodies including national and supranational level it can be stated that data looking at the different nationalities and their preferred activities are lacking. However, tourist arrival statistics provide information about the countries of origin which again can be used as a basis when deciding what markets to target. But further research might be carried out in order to obtain more detailed data about the different nations and their consumer behaviour. This again, could help to adapt the product better to the key target group(s) and improve service and marketing mix strategy. According to the findings it can be recommended to enter the French hospitality market but it should be also paid attention to the risks mentioned above. Only so,