Rousseau has always been typified as an intellectual outsider; it was, however, only in the twentieth century that his socio-political theory came to be seen as a threat to the individual's liberty. 'The citizens having but one interest', Rousseau argues, 'the people [have] but a single will'. The question I will look at here is thus to what extent the critical assertion holds truth that 'the more safeguards he established against despotism, the more weapons he forged for tyranny',
Recent criticism has argued that the Cold War split has caused intellectuals to make an over-simplified distinction between 'individualistic liberalism and state collectivism', stating that Rousseau was on the totalitarian side of the argument. Arguing that pre-modern, pre-social man exercised an individual sovereignty free from social obligation or commitment, knew a natural, brutal kind of liberty. In this sense, envisaging a social contract is merely a theoretical exercise, to find a form in which such an exercise of sovereignty can be best expressed, in other words, 'Rousseau's purpose is to discover a
Another point of view insists on the juxtaposition of democracy and liberalism, positioning Rousseau in a radically democratic framework. Liberalism can be taken at an individual level, stressing the removal of any constraint on human action (negative liberty), and placing theory in wider context, that of the body politic (positive liberty). 'Man is born free; and everywhere he is in chains', he argues, 'One thinks himself the master of others, and still remains a greater slave than they'. Here we find the distinction that Rousseau makes between a narrow form of personal interest and a wider, more coherent form of enlightened interest, being the best for the community, and thus, indirectly, each citizen's actual will, as it secures the best-considered proposal and enjoys general support of the citizenry. Subordination to the law subsequently only becomes an exercise of one's liberty.
Exercising one's freedom through abiding by the law is only reasonable if lawgiver and subject are the same person. This is where Rousseau takes a radically democratic stance, criticising Kant's very open assertion that law can still be legitimate only by the requirement that the requirement 'that the proposal Unanimity is thereby not needed; it is in fact a sign of an unhealthy body politic. The only law that requires unanimity of all citizens is the social pact, since by this each individual hands over their individual sovereignty to the higher expression of the community. It has therefore been claimed that the general will represents a model for the well-being of all, and thus reflects 'each individual's good or real will'.
The emphasis that Rousseau lays on the collective, however, is today regarded with mistrust. After all, the functioning of the general will depends entirely upon the full dedication of the citizenry to the social contract, and we find 'no restriction of principle on what it may command in that form'. As soon as all sovereignty passes from the individual to the state, a greater power comes to exist which '[man] cannot use without the help of others'. In a wider interpretation of the social contract as merely a thought experiment, this socialisation obtains a somewhat enforced character.
One form of criticism of the general will draws parallels with the Jacobin rule during the French revolution. Both reveal traces of absolutist totalitarianism: 'It is absolutely necessary that evil come from others and from them alone'. Eastern block socialism, which has been suggested as imposing some for of a state-directed will upon its citizens, has been severely criticised. Lacking everywhere has been the binding together of lawgiver and subject, which according to Rousseau results only in the imposition a particular will of a state governed by a political elite.
It is true that Rousseau is most concerned with the organisation of social order based upon the exercise of virtue, rather than on preserving the individual's relative freedom of action. Through this construct, Rousseau categorically denies the individual any sovereignty except for a participatory role in the community. Effectively, the state attains a strongly fortified position in which ' [t]he more the natural strengths are dead and destroyed, the more the acquired ones are great and durable, and the more solid and perfect this institution is'.
One of Rousseau's ideas of human nature was that the strongest of human passions was 'If this leads to intervention in 'areas which are perceived as illiberal, such as the social and economic conditions of citizen's lives and with their beliefs and values', this is seen by Rousseau as a decision of the general will in order to secure the necessary conditions for socio-political liberty. Executive and lawmaking government of the welfare state is now generally expected to create policy that benefits the community in a broad social sense. Taxation, health security and economic intervention are put in place to equalise conditions and ensure a minimum standard of welfare for each citizen, whereas participation in elections for government positions is open to each citizen. This form of moderate liberal welfare state, however, fails to pass the test, since in this model the law does not come from all.
The dichotomy between modern, individualist liberalism and the Rousseauean state lies predominantly in their different interpretations of liberty. Whereas the former stress the lack of protection for the individual in Rousseau's social contract, Rousseau in turn entertains concerns with the crude, unsocial kind of liberty that individualists profess. Rather does he see liberty in a community best exercised at the highest level, thus enhancing liberty in an ordered way. As liberty exercised only on the most individual, narrow level only furthers contradiction in interests, Rousseau proposes the pursuit of community interest, which, if carried out fully, secures the welfare and safety of all its citizens. What Rousseau does not display enough attention to, however, was the fact that 'there is never a perfect fit between moral requirements of our rational nature and requirements of citizenship'. Rousseau, on the contrary, believes in the stabilising role of the general will, and the inalienability of the will in general. The problem, nonetheless, lies with the radical solution Rousseau's general will poses. Asserting that '[t]o be governed by appetite alone is slavery, while obedience to a law one prescribes to oneself is freedom', Thus, a community taking its legislative task to the extreme, might indeed force its citizens into abide by the law. The question becomes, then, not to what extent Rousseau can be used for totalitarian ends, which he explicitly sets out to prevent, but rather how a feasible system may be envisaged in which particular interpretations of the general good can obtain a stable construct in which the individual is both more protected and better positioned to criticise the state's pursuit of the general good.