Launch new title in the established CUP Illustrated History series: increase brand
Retain previous customers by emailing CUP's existing customer database
Gain new customers by expanding the market for these books to the interested general reader, and partnering the SOAS. Gather information on these new customers for future promotions
Compete successfully with OUP's new Middle East publication
Stimulate trial, by including listings of other titles in the series (current and future) along with promotional material for this one
Expand "off-season" sales, exploiting political timing as opposed to seasonality
Increase shelf space in high street bookstores
Increase CUP's market share in hardback History publishing and encourage paperback sales for 2007, increasing CUP's market share in Asia and General History publishing as a whole
Bring out paperback in time to capture current public interest in the Middle East, meaning maximum sales and potential for trade crossover
This is a trade/academic crossover title, which means we will target several segments:
We will use our existing customer database to target previous buyers with information about the title, and promote it to our extensive list of academics, libraries and booksellers. Our subject-based team will communicate with colleagues in other disciplines to ensure this crossover title reaches all its target readers.
Promotion for this title will be an intense campaign, geared to sell through several different marketing channels over a short period of time. We will take advantage of current interest in the topic and the editor's reputation in Middle Eastern academia to appeal to Whilst we hope to develop the market by introducing new customers to the existing series, we are primarily selling an existing product to the same market so the focus will be on the largest and fastest possible sales.
Our marketing campaign for
Cooperative promotion with the School of Oriental and Asian Studies (SOAS) will ensure the title is promoted on their website and through direct mail to their members (over 200 academics and 3,200 students from over 1000 countries). This means that information about the new title will directly target those with a specialised interest in the subject area. We are confident of securing this deal due to our established links with the institute: we publish their six society journals, and this year published
 By targeting both loyal customers, and new customers in the specialised field through personal emails and catalogue mailing, we will build customer loyalty to the CUP brand. Mass customisation through personal emails is effective cost per contact.
The Cambridge University Press website features a full description of the book, full table of contents, and a brief biography, 6 months prior to publication. The URL for the book can be used as part of the editor's email autosignature, in order to raise awareness of the title. Our website has an integrated ordering system and offers customers the opportunity to browse catalogues online and sign up to our online mailing service. Customers can use 'DataShop' to receive one-off or regular files automatically by email or FTP.
In the field of electronic marketing we have an extensive database of global email contacts profiled by subject interest and profession, to whom we regularly post targeted email messages to encourage adoptions and sales. In this case we would target journalists, academics and politicians with an interest in Middle East Studies and related disciplines. Studies of academic ordering patterns show that academics use direct e-marketing to amass information, and then order through bookstores. The focus of our direct marketing campaign will therefore be
We have a fully searchable database of titles on our web site ( We can post banner advertisements for the new book on the homepages of related titles.
On publication, the book will be automatically announced to subscribers to 'Cambridge Alerts', an email alerting service for academics keen to keep in touch with new publications in their fields of interest: emails will target the market precisely. Subscribers to this service can also order examination copies direct from the web, and receive special offers and newsletters. For further details, visit
We will promote and display
Upon publication, relevant media and society journals will receive review copies of the book. Our review list and a full conference listing is detailed in Appendix VIII.
We will place advertisements in relevant Cambridge journals (i.e.  An advertisement in
Our We will emphasise the emotional appeal of the title to intellectual aspirations: it provides a certain scholarly image for the general reader, and keeps academics informed on the latest debates.
The editor will promote the book in the press and media, conferences, and interviews on Panorama and Newsnight. Halliday's book
Post-publication, sales will be evaluated through Nielson Bookscan and website sales figures. Retail customers can complete a feedback form on our website, or email forbooksellers@cambridge.org to comment. Customers ordering on the website or through catalogues can email Giulia Portuese-Williams regarding the title. 'Cambridge Alerts' provides information on Cambridge websales.
POS will show whether we have succeeded in reaching the general reader as well as the academic, whose response is assessed through email and institutional sales. A Nielsen comparison of our sales with OUP's
If the title has been a success, the paperback version will be published as quickly as possible so as to take full advantage of the current interest in the Middle East. If response is poor, we may have to rethink our paperback campaign.