Rapidly growing e-commerce, tied with increasingly global Business-to-Consumer interface by way of modern ICTs, continues to attract the interest of firms and customers (Buhalis, 2003, La et al., 2002). In this context, distribution, or channel strategy, relates to tourism and hospitality as a critical factor of competitiveness (Buhalis, 2001a; Lynch, 2003). The aim of this assignment is thus put into view; how can companies monopolize on ICT and Electronic Distribution to gain competitive advantages. The assignment presents an international travel package, examined through 3 distribution channels subsequently discussed, evaluated to relevant theories from a consumer and business perspective to determine the comparative effectiveness of each channel.
Consult Appendices 1 & 2 for Distribution Illustration and Relevant terms Glossary.
Travel plans require the gathering of numerous sources of information on particular destinations; thus the intangibility, and distance, of such products is a considerable emotional investment, irreplaceable if anything goes wrong (Buhalis et al. , 2001b, O'Connor, 1999; La et al, 2002). Tourism distribution hence consists in providing sufficient information, combination, and travel plan services via suitable and accessible points-of-sale (Buhalis, 2001a; Middleton et al., 2001). Globalisation, the theory of converging markets in response to modernity, intensifies information demand; and so, distribution channels are effective tools to ease decision-making, and reduce perceived risks (Buhalis, 2001a; Levitt, 1983). Until the early 90's electronic distribution channels were described as 'a cosy status quo between the CRSs and the GDSs'; used by the airline industry and later adopted by tourism and hospitality (Buhails  et al. , 2001b; O'Connor, 2004, p.185). Despite an evolutionary link between the two, CRSs leading to GDSs, connecting growing numbers of these systems often proved costly and technical; often requiring a Switch to translate transactions into a compatible, computer language (O'Conner, 2004). Despite lucrative mass bookings, these distribution channels proved expensive and inflexible; particularly in marketing more dynamic, and complex, hotel products versus simpler, stable, airline seats (Buhalis  et al. , 2001b; O'Connor, 2004).
While such channels still exist, suppliers seek faster, economical, more direct means to distribute information to evermore demanding tourists (Buhalis et al. , 2001b). As a result tourism and ICT developments, are closely interrelated and unclear as to which industry depends on the other (Buhalis, 2003; Law et al., 2004; Middleton et al., 2001). Even so, global reach, information access speed and richness, rely on continued ICT progress; that is, a demand for precise and quickly flowing information throughout the tourism industry needs ICT progress to ease these functions (Buhalis, 2003; O'Connor, 1999).
Consult Appendices 1 & 2 for Distribution Illustration and Relevant terms Glossary.
Initially created to aid research groups, the internet has grown considerably as a global marketing platform; where firms and consumers rapidly and effectively exchange information, products, and services (La et al. , 2002; May, 2000; O'Connor, 1999). Thus, the travel and tourism industry with its propensity to seek information on services and products, tied with increased tourism demand; has placed the Internet as one of the industry's most used communication and distribution channels (Middleton et al. , 2001; Law et al. , 2004; Wynne et al., 2001). The Web allows suppliers to directly target the desired consumers at any time and location with an internet connection; achievable by lower distribution costs with desirable speed and flexibility (Middleton et al. , 2001; Law et al. , 2004). Conversely, some suppliers benefit from outsourcing services to third-party retailers; who may in turn increase global reach and awareness by indirect marketing (La et al., 2002). While core consumer needs remain unaffected, the Web has reformed the exchange of information through accessible websites; empowering travellers to arrange, evaluate, and perform their own transactions at any given time from, almost, any location with suitable web connections (Middleton et al. 2001; O'Connor, 1999; La et al., 2002; Law et al. , 2004; Wynne et al. , 2001).
Whether purchasing a product or service, decisions often depend upon a person's demographics and psychographics (Adcock et al. , 2001). In this case the customer profile resembles Scuba Divers; well-educated, young, single, financially secure, mostly male (Tabata, 1992). The chosen consumer is a 24 year old, single, Caucasian male, named Andres; a recent Masters graduate with a higher level of education. Raised by a collective and supportive family, Andres' financially secure parents are paying for his final self-discovery as a graduation gift before he enters the workforce; offering their full, annual, budgetary support of 34-37 a year. For 'hardcore' divers like Andres, solitary travel is tied with searching for new thrills and spending more money to pursue a diving experience; leading to search for challenging dive experiences and 'drawing power of exotic or interesting flora or fauna' (Jennings, 2003, p.142).
The package offered by Unreal Dive (Aggregator), is an 11 day trip starting in Cape Town, South Africa, known for cage-diving with Great White Sharks. Priced at 2,066 per person, (Consult Appendix 5 - Package) the trip adds in all specified meals, accommodations, ground transportation, and Diver Insurance; yet excludes all flights, alcoholic drinks, and unspecified meals. The package's booking nature, provides a choice of dates; yet June-November are ideal for shark sightings; so the choice is 1 st - 12 th September. As per the itinerary, the initial 4 days in Cape Town not only include cage-dives, but a dive in Two Oceans Aquarium, and tours of local attractions. Day 5 entails a stopover at a winery, with lunch and wine tasting, before continuing by private bus to Hermanus, 2 hours away. The next 2 days are intensive dives in Shark Alley where ample sharks can be seen. On the afternoon of day 7, guests are taken to a hotel of their choice in Cape Town; before booking a flight on their own to Krueger National Park; an add-on 4 day trip including accommodations, specified meals, safaris and road transport to and from the airport; without the independent flight back to Cape Town.
The AID-10 Framework (consult Appendix 6) lists ten questions for evaluating a web site, subsequently discussed for selected services related to the above mentioned package. Thus the attempt to maintain similar, if not equal, services across distribution channels is needed. Yet while every attempt was made to maintain this criterion, the niche product, and unavailability of a few services through some channels, required a degree of modification; further discussed later in this assignment. While the following evaluations may hold a level of subjectivity, the attempt is made to objectively justify the scoring of each question (consult Appendix 7). Websites including NetMechainic and Webxact were used to evaluate the technical and accessibility issues mentioned earlier.
The extent to which the internet has affected the tourism industry has changed the way in which consumers not only access, but engage in online transactions; increasing the frequency and acceptance of e-commerce (Middleton et al., 2001). While true to most cases, opposing authors argue that despite increasing volume of online travel sales and marketing, some travellers still rely on travel agents in providing the human touch and professional  service elements lacking on the Web (Palmer et al. , 1999 cited in Law et al. , 2004). It thus becomes a question of 'the ends justifying the means' in this case the users' experience and how to improve an online presence through this view (Dalgleish, 2000, p.2). Indeed the assignment thus supports the theory that while the internet has become a revolutionary channel of distribution, with the added benefits of richness and reach, simply distributing mass information through this channel may not be sufficient (O'Connor, 1999). As the AID 10 framework suggests, various issues link to such a theory and indicate that for a site to truly be useful it must abide to certain criteria to efficiently deliver this information. As the theory suggests, this is increasingly vital to encourage online purchases by way of not only informative, but additionally secure and privacy sensitive transactions.
As the evaluations have illustrated, various firms have taken to the web as a means to increase global reach, yet they leave room for improvement. Beginning with the aggregator for example, while the site offers access to rich content by way of eased navigation, the lacking search capability may hinder users' further access to onsite and external information. It would thus be recommendable the site consider providing at least a basic form of search engine; in so doing, the company could better interact with its users by way of providing search access for the excluded flight element of the package, and further justify the use of cookies by the site. On this assumption users may become more inclined to book the package, knowing they may concurrently search the web for potential flights to Cape Town, which will be stored for future access.
Ultimately, this site is recommended to incorporate at least basic security measures into the booking form; and while it can be argued that an online bookings are dissimilar to true online transactions, they stills involve users submitting personal information online. By providing added security measures, as per the theory, the company could thus increase trust levels between the user and supplier. Additional changes to improve the value adding features on the website could include the adoption of a virtual tour, such as the one in SharkCageDiving.net. This would further benefit the company in meeting the increased demand for more graphic information; the proverbial a picture is worth a thousand words (O'Connor, 2004).
Indeed one of the more exemplary sites of this assignment, South African Airlines further supports this view. The site is a good example of the proper use of both security measures, and justified privacy intrusion, to develop higher levels of trust with users to encourage online transactions and return visits. Yet despite its efforts to present site content in an organized lay out, the lack of graphics may result in the site appearing less aesthetically pleasing to graphically demanding users. A recommendation would thus be to include a 'welcome' animation of relevant images, such as crew members tending to passengers, in an effort for the website to simulate the human touch and professional service available to consumers.
Research suggests developments of electronic distribution have also resulted in disintermediation to a considerable scale, particularly within the South African tourism industry (Wynne et al. , 2001). Thus, being a relatively new online integrator, presents cybercapetown the opportunity to better reach a global market through its site; yet substantial room for improvement remains. As discussed, to effectively meet the demand for rapid flowing information throughout the tourism industry, requires progress in ICT maintenance (Buhalis, 2003). An immediate recommendation would thus be upgrading maintenance programs and efforts to ensure the smooth operation of the site's navigation and search bar; unhelpfully affected by errors. This could benefit the company in aiding users to access the extensive amount of information the site offers, and potentially engage in already secure transactions, thus spreading positive word of mouth. Reducing excess scrolling with anchors, in addition to restructuring the layout of the site, would further strengthen the readability and organized appearance of the website. Moreover, it is recommended the site make more use of personalization such as a 'shopping cart' option similar to the one offered by Amazon.com. This could justify the sites invasion of privacy through cookies while further providing users with the incentive to use a site which promises to remember the user upon return.
The Principals in this assignment, as the analysis suggests, have demonstrated that while the internet has provided increased levels of direct marketing for such channels, to an extent more niche and boutique companies have yet to fully employ the usage of electronic distribution. Indeed the Website Evaluation (Appendix 7) indicates these sites are relatively difficult to access via their often complex URL, supporting the theory that they may benefit from outsourcing their site design services to online intermediaries or infomeadiaries (La et al. , 2001). A recommendation of this nature however, has to be carefully considered, owing to the increased risk of brand dilution; assumed to be an already delicate element to this market. To this extent a more plausible recommendation would be to outsource to a specialized integrator, thus benefiting the companies through increased reach while providing those lesser effective sites the opportunity to possibly benefit from outside market intelligence. Such is the case with the Auberge Burgundy, among the weakest of sites, which under this assumption could benefit from outsourcing its site to an internet savvy integrator to effectively improve on the company site. Similar reintermediation would benefit the shark cage diving Principals, which as suggested by the analysis lack the opportunities to be accessed through integrators. Under this assumption, the Principals could thus benefit from increased visits via higher levels of access to the company sites by desired target markets. As with all the latter mentioned Principals a final recommendation, would be to provide basic levels of security and privacy measures. Even with the continued use of bookings such measures could entice users to consider the Principals further when making decisions, and gathering travel information. Additional personalization of site experiences to selected target markets could allow such niche companies to develop stronger levels trust and loyalty. The final issue of accessibility is an area which has affected all websites; indeed the web as a whole. While it may be argued that this particular package requires a certain level of fitness, the use of the internet in accessing information is not limited to able bodied individuals. Thus a final a recommendation is for the selected channels to pursue future goals in meeting the necessary guidelines to enrich the knowledge of all individuals.
Ultimately the implications of the assignment present a considerable modification of the original travel package, and to some extent, may have skewed the overall findings and discussion. While in some cases modifications were inevitable, owing to technical errors of the web, some were more related to the incapability of certain channels to meet more specialized demands; a possible area for improvement for both Principals and Intermediaries. Nonetheless, the assignment demonstrates how the dynamic nature of the tourism industry, tied with distributive capacity of ICT phenomena such as the internet, have established new parameters of modern marketing and pricing strategy (Middleton  et al. , 2001). Ultimately, developments in distribution channels provide the travel and tourism industry the means with which to better integrate the value of desired consumers; providing firms the opportunity to better design effective online services, transactions, and security measures to enhance the levels of required trust in exchanging valuable information over the increasingly important world wide web.