The marketing catch phrase a picture is worth a thousand words, while in some cases true, presents a paradox related to human behaviour; while products and services may be influential, The study of , 2000). Authors agree that improved understanding of consumers' internal, psychological, processes is important for companies to meet the needs of desired target markets (Goeldner , 2000; Hudson , 2000; Middleton , 2001, Usunier Even so the tourism industry presents a unique challenge owing to the intangibility of services, coupled with extensive periods of time travellers invest in planning and purchasing an , 2000). As travellers become more sophisticated the question arises as to why particular groups of travellers seek a certain service X within destination Y (Goeldner , 2000; Moutinho, 1987). Consequently, tourism practitioners need to effectively divide the vacation market into subgroups or Various authors are in agreement that in formulating such strategies, , 1999). Models also provide , 2001). This essay begins with an introduction to
Founded by American actor/director Sam Wanamaker, the Globe Theatre offers a unique global and local resource committed to the exploration of Shakespeare's work, and the playhouse for which he wrote, by way of education and performance. The Globe Theatre is located a short distance from Southwark Bridge in London and is open from May to September. Accessible from both the Visitors may attend several performances by booking gallery seating or standing as Moreover, guests benefit from formal and informal dining facilities, on - site and online shopping, and exhibition halls of various Shakespearean artefacts. Yet one of the more intriguing services the Globe Theatre offers is a vast selection of educative programs, taught jointly with King's College London, targeting students of all ages and nations. It would thus be reasonable to assume that this group of travellers forms a significant segment of the Globe Theatre's visitors; which may consequently be segmented by purpose of travel; namely university students seeking educative events in the performing arts and Shakespearean heritage.
In the past decades, progressive changes in education and tourism have seen a convergence of these industries into , 2003). Even so, , 2003; Swarbrooke , 1999). Today, education and learning are important and recognised components of travel, and to this extent it can be argued all manner of tourism may be educational; thus, research in this broad and complex area remains minimal (Smith , 2003). Still smaller, more identifiable, market segments exist within this broad tourism field. University students are one such segment, yet a chronological definition has been a discussion topic owing to changing demographics; the traditionally accepted age limit of 15 - 25 has been replaced by 18 - 30 (Carr, 2003; Seekings, 1998). This definition has only increased the already considerable number of student travellers in the last decade, which some researchers predict will 'quadruple to 100 million by 2025' (Carr, 2003; Mintel, 2005; Smith , 1997, p. 64). The UK has witnessed increasing numbers of not just the general population entering university, but continues to be one of Europe's most successful educational destinations; owing to the global importance of the English language (Carr, 2003; Smith , 1997). Moreover, a strong correlation is evident between educational visits to-and-within the UK, and theatre attendance in such cities as London; owing to increased search for learning and enlightenment (Gilbert , 1998). In fact, the majority of visited attractions are located in the centre and south bank of London (Virdee , 2003). Even more intriguing is the steadily increasing numbers of students entering higher educations to study history and other related degrees; namely Heritage Studies (English Heritage, 2003). Despite the considerable size and growth of university students, little research has been conducted to understand this segment's needs, desires, and behaviour (Carr, 2003). However, what is known is this segment displays a range of similar educational motives as other tourists travelling to learn; subsequently illustrated in the following page (Ritchie , 2003). Furthermore, studies of this segment have covered the One such widely held misconception relates to expenditure, the belief being that students and younger tourists spend less than other market segments (Carr, 2003; Seekings, 1998; Smith , 1997). Arguably, trips abroad are indeed high items on a student's annual budget, and many may be price sensitive; yet they are prepared to pay what is a relatively high price for their trip because they place high value on the In some cases a student's parents bear the cost of educational trips, while in other cases, even if rare, students in full-time employ can cover costs (Carr, 2003; Smith , 1997). In a study of British university students, Carr (2003) found that despite living in financial debt, this did not deter students from local and global Travel. This supports the theory that students are gradually more accustomed to borrowing money, be it form banks, student loans, or relatives (Davies , 1995 cited in Carr, 2003). In fact, 2002 estimates saw an average student debt of Nonetheless, students tend to stay longer and have higher total average spending than average adults (Seekings, 1998). Though preferring independent travel, some students travel as part of a degree or by ERASMUS and other such language exchange programmes (Carr, 2003). Technology has also impacted the segment by way of Studies show however, that while students believe such virtual excursions provide useful learning opportunities they can not, and should not, replace real excursions (Spicer 2001 cited in Carr, 2003). In fact, students use formal and informal In summary, despite rising monetary issues, the number of university students is increasing and an eventual aim of tourism managers should be to better understand this major segment.
The model proposed by
As subsequently shown, the model entails three major boxes, which are further subdivided into nineteen variables related to consumer travel and tourism purchase-consumption frameworks. The eight variables in Box 1 influence thinking and planning actions prior and during travel; that is influence of family, friends, peers and groups have on a consumer's information gathering, problem solving, and overall decision making (Woodside , 2001). The eight variables within Box 2 relate to specific destinations and/or actions that make up the actual trip; in other words, the readily available choices to travellers including attractions, lodgings, and dining establishments (Woodside , 2001). Box 3 is a vital , 2001). Indeed such findings form the , 2001). Throughout the model, various direct and indirect predictors have interrelated affects on tourists' choice decisions; hence linking arrows imply , 2001). Overall, the framework 'shows three stages of pre-trip, during - trip, and after - trip information exposure, comprehension-acceptance, and decision to buy or reject (Woodside
The question arises how to use the model to understand desired segments; in this case, how can the Globe improve its understating of university students. One such area of application includes the ability of the host-country and institution to provide desirable quality of reputation and lifestyle; deemed important incentives, or , 2002) and the subsequent topic of Box 2.
While limited research on university students may complicate the application of a behaviour model, under the assumption that such travellers search for similar motives as other educational tourists, the task is not impossible. To begin with, the analysis suggests England's reputable and educative characteristics; continue to attract both local and global students. Furthermore, as mentioned, the city capital of London is considered among the country's major hubs and tourist destinations. Thus Similarly, Even so, there is only Still the Globe Theatre offers a variety of educational From interactive lectures and workshops, to fencing classes, to performances and exhibitions; this vast selection can effectively enable the Theatre to meet the The Globe Shop could further add to the experience, albeit minimally, by offering While three classes of on-site dining facilities meet the On the one hand students may insight into English cuisine and table-etiquette, yet the cultural dining experience is thus confined. Ultimately, despite the provision of various activities, this does not mean the Globe Theatre would be the main attraction to students. Once again the propensity to seek further knowledge through travel would impact the In addition, while not as relevant as other variables, the Globe Theatre's lack of Overall it is evident that the application of the proposed consumer behaviour model can generate an increasing awareness of what could motivate potential students to visit the Globe Theatre. Furthermore, the model indicates possible existing limitations which can positively or negatively impact the student segment. To some extent it can be argued that in some cases the affects of such limitations are only assumptions, and yet this raises a further issue relative to future trends; that is to say, what behavioural trends can be expected from university students in the next ten years.
It is widely recognized that the pace of societal change impacts trends, be they economical, social, or lifestyle, and inevitably these trends impact tourism and other businesses (ETC, 2005; Middleton , 2001). Authors agree one trend is consumers becoming better educated and interested in continuing education by way of further schooling or educative tourism (ETC, 2005; Middleton , 2001; Ritchie , 2003). Yet this behavioural trend can be interrelated to other trends thus making it nearly impossible to isolate development into a single element (ETC, 2005). As suggested, an accurate definition of university students has yet to be formulated due to changing , 2003). As depicted in the following table, such changes have broadened the definition of students to include pension-able adults and professionals; thus, targeting "older" generations, empty-nesters, and DINK couples, could increase the appeal of the Globe Theatre to a broader, educational tourism market. The additional impact of , 2001; Holley, 2002). As suggested, students remain unsure on the benefits of virtual seminars and distance learning. While the Globe Theatre provides such programmes, stressing the Transportation in turn is developing faster, economical, and direct travel to desired destinations; and yet, road congestion and reduced coach travel is expected to be problematic (ETC, 2005). Although, the Globe Theatre is accessible by various modes, it would thus be suitable for the theatre to facilitate tourists' travel with suggestive comments on preferable modes of transport; namely trains, and the underground.
In order to meet the predicted behavioural trend of increased university student enrolment, the Globe Theatre would need to further improve on the Model implications previously indicated. In tackling the issue of Such a cooperative venture would increase the Providing more Moreover, publicising dining locations throughout London could generate increased awareness of the Globe Theatre; that is by way of Similar impacts could be witnessed by way of providing further A recommendation would therefore be to form a marketing alliance with other This could increase the perceived educational attractiveness of both the Southwark area and the efforts of the Globe Theatre in facilitating students' learning opportunities. While it is true the Globe Theatre's main purpose is to provide an educational experience through theatrical performances, the lack of accommodations could quite possibly affect students' perceptions. A final recommendation would hence be to provide information on neighbouring lodging facilities including hotels, hostels, and guest houses. This would benefit the Globe Theatre in the long run, assuming the growing number of university students would require somewhere to stay if enrolled in a year-long MA, or short period programme. Not only would the students gain a An illustrative interpretation of such proposed recommendations is subsequently included on the final page of this essay.
As already noted, the study of consumer behaviour ultimately seeks to gain information to enforce the comprehensive understanding of tourists' decision - making processes. Such information ultimately benefits both the political and tourism aspects of a destination by way of facilitating, and improving, industry planning (Woodside , 2001). Moreover, by way of predictive consumer behaviour models, marketers may study the intricate relationships of consumer behaviour on a micro level; the theory being the relative findings, once overlaid on to a macro level, aid in developing more effective marketing to desired segments (Woodside , 2001). As discussed, the aim of the essay was to provide an evaluative extract as to how the successful use of a consumer behaviour model, could help to enhance a tourism manager's understanding of a particular segment. In the case of the Shakespeare's Globe Theatre the goal of providing an overall educational experience, can be positively linked to the university student segment. As indicated however, the lack of Nevertheless, the findings would suggest that in an effort to better meet the predicted behavioural trends of a growing With world tourism predicted to grow to include added elements relating to the arts, culture, and history; the Globe Theatre looks set to gain a significant advantage, by way of effective marketing, and in becoming a component in a complex decision-making process.