Project Title
Comparison of captive female chimpanzee behaviour in an all-female group with mixed-sex groups in UK zoos.
Flagship Species
Common chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes)
Country of Planned Project Dates of Project
UK May 2006 - September 2006
Project Summary
Dudley Zoo houses a group of seven female chimpanzees. The only male in the group died in 2005 of natural causes, making it the only known all-female group of captive chimpanzees in a UK zoo. I can find no documentation of current all-female groups of chimpanzees in other captive settings, though there may be some in research laboratories or zoos elsewhere. It is of interest whether this living arrangement in any way impacts upon the behaviour of the female chimpanzees, when compared to females living in mixed sex groups. To try to investigate this, I will be comparing the activity budgets and social behaviour of the all-female group with four other groups of zoo chimpanzees of similar size which include adult males. I will use focal animal instantaneous samples, along with group scans. With five groups I would have enough samples to undertake statistical analysis.
Preliminary observations and anecdotal narratives from keepers at Dudley Zoo suggest that there may be a limited amount of activity among the group of female chimpanzees, and a hypothesis can be stated that the absence of males decreases the amount of activity among females. As well as making comparisons to four other groups of chimps, I will also address the activity budgets of wild chimpanzees, to see if there is any difference. Social relationships are crucial to the well-being of chimpanzees (ILAR, 1998). Anecdotal observations suggest few agonistic exchanges among the all-female group, and again this will be compared to the mixed-sex groups. If there are behavioural social differences, they may be due to individual personalities, housing conditions, kin relationship, changing social structure, age, reproductive state, season, climate or other factors. However, it may also be in part because of the absence of males in the group. If the hypothesis holds and this appears to be the case, this style of social housing has implications for captive chimpanzee management and may raise questions about whether to keep groups stable or make changes.