Some of the oldest existing men's magazines are Chris Astridge launched 'For Him Magazine' - formerly  Although this is 13.6% less than the same period in 2004, The latest circulation figures for other monthly men's publications are less than half that of
The rise in popularity of men's magazines relates to men's lifestyle changes in the mid 1980s. In general men began to stay single for longer and had more disposable income. Publishers recognised a demand for men's lifestyle magazines, and many existing men's titles broadened their content. Initially
It is interesting that the 'male script' portrayed in men's magazines can be so different from one to another. This is largely related to the age of the target reader. At one end of the market is The mean age of its readers is 31, compared to 27 for The idea of the magazine is to encourage men to reach their full potential in all areas of life. Its unexpected popularity reflects the recent change in the definition of masculinity. For example it is more common and acceptable for men to take responsibility for their health and appearance than thirty or forty years ago. But this might in fact be a consequence of the media rather than the media being a reflection of society. There is a similar problem regarding
IPC Media launched It is often referred to as the first 'lad mag', because it marked a break from the earlier men's lifestyle magazines that focused on sophistication and style. In the first issue, the magazine's philosophy stated; " The nature and content of such magazines reflected the emerging 'laddish culture' of the 1990s that could also be seen in television programmes like ' The typical
Recently, the success of men's monthlies like  They are similar in content, attitude and layout, although In the last 6 months Ultimately, men's magazines reflect conceptions of masculinity at the time, particularly those that are successful. Both
Consumer magazines consist of both 'general' and 'specialist' titles. Food and drink magazines fall into the 'specialist' category; they are "for people with sharply defined hobbies and pursuits" (John Morrish, p13). Perhaps inevitably then, there is competition from general interest titles that include their own food and drink sections, such as In addition most supermarkets publish a magazine, although these also contain other areas of interest besides food and drink. For example, Supermarket magazines are rarely actively bought;
This analysis will focus on magazines that are primarily about food and drink, and are paid for by the consumer. The most popular title in this category is From July to December 2005, In comparison,
 Their emphasis on quality can be seen from the glossy, high quality paper used. Another similarity is in the design and layout;
In addition, The majority of this target audience is female - 85% of From their market research Consequently they are able to spend a reasonable amount of money on food and cooking utensils.
On the other hand,  This is reflected in the print techniques and paper used, together with the magazine's price of
The fact that the economic status of readers of In 2004 BBC Magazines attempted to reach a broader audience by publishing Its lower price of
In conclusion, the food and drink magazine market is more competitive than it initially may seem. Although food and drink is a long-term specialist interest, magazine titles in this area still fluctuate in terms of popularity and sales. Many publications compensate by including other areas of interest - one example is supermarket magazines as discussed earlier.
The teenage magazine market is dominated by girl's titles, as teenage boys tend to read magazines on their hobbies and interests. These fall into other magazine markets such as sport, motoring or music. For this reason, this analysis focuses on three significant teenage girls magazines - .
Since its launch ten years ago, This may only be temporary, as The latest circulation figures published by ABC are; 267 109 for .
The circulation figures for teenage magazines are not as high as adult publications; one reason is that the majority of teenagers under 16 are not yet earning. Another reason is that it is common for girls to read their magazines together rather than separately. Consequently, teenage girls magazines are passed around groups of friends, more so than adult magazines are.
 are fairly similar in their content and style, including articles on relationships, fashion and celebrity gossip. Each magazine also has an internet site that features quizzes, competitions and horoscopes. Their core buyers are teenage girls aged 12 - 17. There are also other titles in this market aimed at the slightly younger age group of 10 - 14 year old girls. The problem is that these age ranges can be ambiguous. Teenage girls mature rapidly during this period and often choose products that are intended for older age groups. A highly debated issue regarding teenage magazines is that of appropriate content and language. It has been suggested that age restrictions should be printed clearly on the front of magazines, to protect younger girls from inappropriate sexual content.
The circulations of all magazines in the teenage market are in decline. This may be because teenagers are choosing to spend their money in other areas, such as mobile phones and text messaging. This might explain that fact that in the last five years the teenage magazine market has significantly decreased in its total size. Former publications
Some publishers including Hachette Filipacchi, the publishers of Not only are they maturing faster, but teenagers are becoming increasingly fragmented into many sharply defined groups. Therefore it is hard to find common attitudes and interests among teenagers simply by grouping them in terms of age or gender.
The music magazine market has been challenged recently by changes in technology. From the late 20 IPC Media decided to merge At the same time Emap Consumer Media closed Only a month earlier in October 2000 magazine reformed its logo and layout, presumably in response to the decline in the music magazine industry around this time.
Some of the key publications in the current music magazine market are There are also more specific titles for niche areas of the market, for example Out of these,
Most music magazines are monthly publications, except for published by Emap.  It started in 1952, making it the oldest existing music magazine.
Kerrang! is dedicated to "rock in all its forms" and has been since the first issue came out in June 1981. According to the latest Audit Bureau of Circulation (ABC) figures published in February 2006, is only 600 copies behind ). The core target audience for is 15-24 year olds, and there is a 60:40 male:female ratio (NRS). In comparison the mean age of The median age of This is reflected by the language used in the magazines; uses more colloquial language to appeal to a younger audience. On the other hand,
Yet despite sales being in decline, music magazines still hold their influence in the music scene. Many upcoming artists and bands rely on music magazines as a medium to reach potential fans and increase their recognition. For example 'The Strokes', 'Kaiser Chiefs' and 'Arctic Monkeys' all shot to fame after appearing on the front of titles such as and
Many titles have attempted to turn modern technology from a threat into an opportunity. Magazines such as and For example Kerrang! is also a digital radio station playing many sub-genres of rock.