Form is the opposite of 'paraphrasable content'; it means how something is said as opposed to what is said. It can also be interpreted as genre or literary type, in this case the novel form. That said, in his 'Ulysses, Order and Myth' T. S. Eliot dismisses the novel form as 'simply the expression of an age which had not sufficiently lost all form to feel the need of something stricter'. He argues that the novel form is unsuitable for accurately representing the experience of modern life, 'because the But it does not reject all form per se; Alan Friedman notes that 'since the taut and highly conceptualized structures of James, we are often confronted by a fiction whose frames, while mattering greatly, are largely hidden'.
A more encompassing definition of form includes structural and textural form. Structure is the plot, story or argument of a text, while texture refers to diction, syntax and metre. 'Since structure is a matter of arrangement, it includes the formal ordering of the content in time' E. M. Forster's definition of a story as chronological, a 'narrative of events arranged in their time sequence' In contrast, modernist texts tend to reject the simple form of the story. Instead many employ a non-chronological or fugal time sequence - this is certainly true for Although the latter traces Stephen's life experiences chronologically, from childhood through adolescence to maturity, these are punctuated by flashbacks and reflections.  Its structure is best described as random and fragmented, as Dowell forewarns in chapter 2;
In fact he attempts both simultaneously, resulting in confusion and obscurity. But rather than being a sign of Ford's inadequate authorial skill, this illustrates that modern life is too chaotic (in Eliot's terms an 'immense panorama') to make sense of by attempting to order it. Likewise, the structural and textural form of At one point there is a letter format, as Stephen imagines writing a short letter to his mother, and his diary extract in the last chapter is not to be forgotten.
Therefore Aristotle's notion of a linear beginning-middle-end plot sequence is absent from all three texts. Conrad and Ford criticise the novel form for being 'straight forward, whereas in your gradual making acquaintance with your fellows you never do go straight forward'.  The crew on board the Nellie are stationary throughout and consequently do not make any progress. Although Marlow progresses psychologically through a journey into the self, his physical journey is still mapped by a cycle, from the Thames to the Belgian Congo and back. In In this respect the beginning-middle-end structure is reversed. Towards the end of his narrative Dowell remarks 'so here I am very much where I started thirteen years ago', The cycle structure adopted by the texts is significant, as it reflects Eliot's concerns about the futility of contemporary history. The only meaningful progression, if any, is personal and psychological, perhaps at the expense of societal progress.
A cyclical pattern is clear in Each chapter builds up to the epiphany as a final climax, only to be undermined in the next chapter. For example in a prostitute's 'warm and lightsome' room at the end of chapter 2 Stephen feels as though 'he had suddenly become strong and fearless and sure of himself'. Similarly the message integral to The horror!', is described as 'the appalling face of a glimpsed truth'.
For example By using an unreliable narrator Ford dissociates both himself as author from his protagonist and us as reader from the story, an effect Conrad also reaches, but by different means. The opening of In both cases the reader is placed further from the truth, and on a more general note this amplifies concerns about certainty in modern society.
The lack of resolution in the texts has a similar disconcerting effect.  The Good Soldier finishes moments before Edward Ashburnham's death, something Dowell seems to add merely as an afterthought.  The light/dark contrast runs throughout the novel, and it is to the concept of theme as a means of structural cohesion that we will now turn.
A motif - a recurring theme, image, idea or symbol - can be an aspect of structural or textural form. Joyce uses many in Another is water; in the first chapter Stephen plays with the hot and cold taps, and remembers the cold, slimy water in the square ditch. The aromatic motif of the 'smell of air and rain' (p.13) is repeated much later in the phrase 'fair rainfragrant hair' (p.248), and in the last chapter a cup of tea reminds Stephen of 'the dark turfcoloured water of the bath in Clongowes'.
Ezra Pound's instruction to 'make it new' led to the emergence of experimental literary forms, a defining feature of modernism. An example of an organic form to originate from the modernist era is stream of consciousness; a technique that aims to capture the 'incessant shower of innumerable atoms' (thoughts, images or sensations) that are caught by 'an ordinary mind on an ordinary day'. For example, Stephen then recalls that 'his father told him that story: his father looked at him through a glass: he had a hairy face'. These sentence fragments cannot be located in a time or place, but are instead connected by their subject (Stephen's father), and succeed in creating a rough sketch of his appearance and relationship to Stephen. Yet as there is no instruction from an omnipotent narrator to the reader, it is harder to separate Stephen's internal perception from the external action.
The absence of a controlling narrator leads us to modernism's preference for showing rather than telling, or in other terms; 'dramatized narration compared with the renarrating Plato called pure In some respects Conrad and Ford do not conform to this ideal, as the reader is constantly aware of the narrator's presence. Conrad uses a layered frame narration and significantly breaks the frame on more than one occasion. This foregrounds the act of story-telling, something Ford does through the self-conscious narration in Dowell frequently refers to his position as narrator and explicitly directs his story to a narratee; 'You, the listener, sit opposite me. But you are so silent. You don't tell me anything'. But at the same time This is important, as the immediacy of this type of narration is truer to our experience of life.
Another point to make here is that the first-person narrator is able to articulate his or her An emphasis on the self rather than society is a key feature of modernity, and this manifests itself in the modern novel through 'psychological realism' as opposed to 'social realism'. Conrad, Ford and Joyce concentrate on the inner minds of their protagonists, often in isolation from their social circumstances. On returning from his journey Marlow recollects;
These lines suffice to highlight the tension between the individual and society in Conrad's Not only is Marlow alienated from others by his knowledge, he sees society as a threat, describing anonymous passers-by as trespassers and intruders. Similarly, in No one visits me for I visit no one'. And finally in the closing pages of
An importance on the self rather than society is also reflected in the egoistic language present in all three texts. The term could be applied to the last quote taken from In Against his sin, foul and secret, the whole wrath of God was aimed'.
Finally, Conrad, Ford and Joyce emphasize character rather than plot. Proceeding the modern era many realist texts exhibit a carefully structured plot, but often at the expense of their characters. Here Forster's separation of character into 'flat' and 'round' is helpful. Round characters are a closer representation of real people, and capture our multiple or fragmented identities in modern life. The protagonists of the three texts in question all fall into the 'round' category. In Like society as a whole, character is no longer static or absolute. It is left up to the reader to decide if characters can be labelled as good or bad for example. In the decline of a moral code in modern society, the distinction has become blurred. In The same issue is present in In many respects Kurtz can be seen as an anti-hero, for he is described to us as being in a state of fatal self-destruction. It is interesting that Joyce discarded his title Perhaps this is because the hero is inextricably linked to the epic or re-telling form of narration.
Let us look at form in relation to genre, for example the classifications of tragedy/comedy/satire or the modes of lyric/epic/dramatic. To structuralist critics each genre has a specific set of codes and formal characteristics, and these help generate reader expectations That said, modernist texts deliberately aim to break reader expectations. In the modern era traditional rigid forms, and this includes genre codes and characteristics, are seen as constraining and unhelpful in expressing reality. This literary anarchy is justified by Virginia Woolf in her essay on 'Modern Fiction', she states; 'if a writer...could base his work upon his own feeling, and not upon convention, there would be no plot, no comedy, no tragedy, no love interest or catastrophe in the accepted style'. He calls his narration instead 'The Saddest Story', 'just because it is so sad... There is about it none of the elevation that accompanies tragedy; there is about it no nemesis, no destiny'. Instead
Texts can also be separated into the sub-genres of lyrical, epic and dramatic forms. Joyce experiments by using all three in Through his protagonist Stephen Dedalus, Joyce describes the dramatic form as an artistic ideal; 'the esthetic image in the dramatic form is life purified in and reprojected from the human imagination'. In comparison, Stephen sees the lyrical form as simply 'an instant of emotion' (p.233), similar to the emphasis on sensations and emotional states at the beginning. In contrast the middle of There is more of a focus on external action, such as the full sermon on hell, but importantly Stephen is still at the centre of this. On a textural scale, the sentences become more complex and fluid, rather than the short fragments of the first chapter. By manipulating form and style Joyce traces Stephen's intellectual and emotional progress, through lyric, epic and finally dramatic form. The diary section at the end of the last chapter attempts to reach Joyce's ideal form of art. It is interesting that his idea of the dramatic form differs from its established definition - traditionally in drama the characters do all the talking, but in Stephen's diary extract there is no recognisable direct speech. Nevertheless this first-person, organic form functions as a precursor to the stream of consciousness technique Joyce perfected in
All the aspects of form this essay has considered relate to an ideological contrast in the break from the stable past to an uncertain future. This brings us back to Eliot's 'mythical method' introduced in the question. In particular The immediacy of the closing diary format of It makes sense then, if the modern present Imposed form is inept for ordering or articulating life as it is now understood - 'a mysterious arrangement of merciless logic for a futile purpose'.