Modernism as a movement came about as a reaction to the 'inescapable forces of turbulent social modernization." The race for empire, World War I, the Suffrage movement, and conflict in Ireland, as well as popular concerns over novel ways of thinking: nihilism, relativism, fakery- all gave rise to a desire for radical breaks with tradition in favour of new beginnings; a desire that 'penetrated the interior of artistic invention." It is a movement characterized by an 'emphasis on verbal texture,' and by 'clusters of images, metaphors and symbols." One of the ways the aesthetics of Modernism were displayed was through the 'disintegration of coherent narratives and settings into startling and apparently unrelated images." The critic R. Emig states that 'poetry...is a paradigm, a model of the pattern, of Modernism;' therefore in order to explore the Modernist's 'attention to "form" as opposed to "content"' and illustrate the move away from a traditional narrative form I will discuss the work of the Imagist Poets. Similarly, James Joyce 'radically departed from the formula-oriented modes and devices of the plotted story' in his collection of short stories, entitled Dubliners, another text I will examine.
It is worth comparing some works of the Imagist Poets to those in the Lyrical Ballads by William Wordsworth and Samuel Taylor Coleridge, in order to see clearly the rejection of 'both explicit and identifiable speakers and narratives' in the latter. Both F. S. Flint's 'Beggar' and Wordsworth's 'The Female Vagrant' deal with the issue of poverty; however, Wordsworth goes to great lengths describing to the reader the 'artless story' of the vagrant. The poem begins with the beginning of her tale:
The reader is presented with the story as a narrative, encompassing the entirety of the vagrant's experience of poverty. The vagrant is speaking directly to the narrator, giving a heightened sense of reality to her tale. In contrast, Flint's poem presents the Beggar 'in the gutter' as he would be seen by a passer-by. The opinions of the beggar himself are of no interest to the poet; instead he is focused on the image of the beggar in itself. Therefore, although their subject matter is similar, the aims of the two poets are different. Whilst Wordsworth's verses can be read as a social commentary, intended to inspire pity in the reader, Flint is striving to present what Ezra Pound called the 'intellectual and emotional complex in an instant of time." Pound stated that an Imagist poet 'seeks out the luminous detail. He does not comment." Thus we, as readers, are given no background and are instead presented with a myriad of impressions: 'huddled and mean,' 'winds beat him,' 'wind from an empty belly.'
This layering of images characterises the poetry of the Modernists which is typically 'made of details' but devoid of a narrative. Flint's poem showcases the 'depersonalizing [of] the poetic voice;' what we are given instead is a picture made almost photographic by an overabundance of details and adjectives: 'shrivelled,' 'draggled,' 'forlorn." By presenting an image in such a manner Flint is demonstrating one of the three 'rules' of the Imagist school: 'direct treatment of the "thing," whether subjective or objective." The lack of a narrative serves to negate what impact the opinions of a conventional narrator may otherwise have had, and thus allows the reader to be much more sensitized to the mood, rather than the moral message, of the piece.
The story 'Counterparts,' in Joyce's Dubliners, is similarly lacking in a moral message. In it, Joyce 'tacitly acknowledges the undercurrents of anger, frustration & helplessness that pervade Irish life." The story clearly showcases the dangers of a life stifled by oppression: Farrington is trapped in a job he dislikes and is treated badly by his boss. He does not act on the 'spasm of rage' that he feels towards Mr Alleyne; instead he cruelly beats his young son on returning home. The cries of the 'little boy' inspire great pathos:
However, like Flint in The Beggar, Joyce is not condemning Farrington's actions. Joyce praised Ibsen for presenting 'average lives in their uncompromising truth,' and in this story he is doing just that. Joyce 'held up a mirror to the average Irishman' in what he termed his 'nicely polished looking glass." In this story and throughout Dubliners Joyce is highlighting the effects of 'moral paralysis or hemiplegia of the will,' something he put down to 'the experience of modern urban life." Like the Imagist poets, Joyce moved away from a traditional narrative form to convey this message, instead recognising 'the complexity of language as the fundamental medium of culture in its historical, creative and unconscious dimensions.'
Joyce's focus on language is skilfully paired with 'a detailed, closely observed depiction of the surfaces of life." As such he adopts a 'naturalistic' approach. Humans are imprisoned in the social and physical; therefore Joyce places less emphasis on a heavily plotted narrative, and the intensity of his stories comes instead from his ability to precisely capture a mood. In 'Eveline' the entirety of the story is presented as a stream of consciousness. Up to the last section there is an air of pensive musing to the tale, as Eveline sits at the window weighing up her decision:
This meditative air is paired with many small details, which add a sense of reality to the story and make it more vivid:
By using language in this manner Joyce is able to capture a precise mood, and although we are given little detail about the life of Eveline herself, by adjusting the style of the story to the experience of the main protagonist, Joyce is able to bring her character alive. Eveline is vague about Buenos Aires, where she is proposing to spend the rest of her life. As readers we can assume that this is due to the fact that she has never previously left Dublin. It is perhaps for this reason that although Eveline feels that 'she must escape' and that 'Frank would save her,' when it comes to it she finds herself in 'a maze of distress:'
We can emphasise completely with Eveline's distress in this story. Despite there being little by way of an 'exciting suspenseful narrative,' the development of her character shows a very human complexity to her wants and desires, a paradoxical nature to her feelings which the readers can easily relate to.
Joyce uses a similar technique to develop a character in 'The Sisters,' the first story in the collection. It is written from the point of view of a young boy, and Joyce is careful, therefore, to keep the language and opinions of the piece consistent with his protagonist. For that reason he changed the following passage which was originally written in a comparatively adult cadence:
The sentence was replaced with the much more straightforward and child-like:
This retains the meaning of the original, yet by simplifying the language and extending the sentence length, Joyce ensures that it is much more in keeping with a younger narrator. Very little action takes place in this story; it is instead the complexity and authenticity of the characterization that maintains the reader's interest.
Joyce immediately sets the tone of the piece with the opening lines. The story opens with a negative: 'There was no hope for him this time,' and throughout the first paragraph the gloomy atmosphere is intensified by his use of language: 'dead,' 'corpse,' 'paralysis." Much of the story takes place at night or at twilight, and throughout is permeated with the powerful image of the 'old priest...lying still in his coffin." The tale ends abruptly, with a startling image: that of the priest in his confession box, 'wide-awake and laughing-like to himself." The unexpected nature of this image could be explained by the Modernist 'resolve to startle and disturb the public." In any case, it ensures that the figure of the priest is a vivid one, showing that '[Joyce's] most powerful characters are often those who are barely seen." By creating such a powerful image Joyce is able to ensure, with out the use of a lengthy narrative, that a character who does not speak once throughout the piece is one who will leave a lasting impression on the reader.
This stress on what was termed the 'doctrine of the image' can also be seen in Richard Aldington's poem, Images. In it, the theme of love is explored in six stanzas, each presenting the reader with striking imagery, made more compelling by the use of both simile and metaphor: 'The blue smoke leaps/ Like swirling clouds of birds vanishing.' 'A rose yellow moon in a pale sky." The style is succinct and direct; language, such as this, 'checked by the application of sculptural analysis,' has the effect of creating a poetic method that is fragmented and yet unified in its presentation of Aldington's 'desires." By using strong imagery in this fashion, Aldington creates a poem that is full of what may be termed 'static beauty.' However despite the clarity and precision of the image, Aldington's poem displays little real emotion or psychology. The character of his love is not revealed to us, nor is the progress of the relationship. This shows the Imagist school's break away from conventional lyric poetry which evolved out of the ballad form, and therefore maintained strong narrative traditions. By 'cutting, arresting, limiting, permitting no flow' in the language used, the Imagists were able to concentrate on capturing a precise mood in their poetry.
A similar focus on mood is seen in John Gould Fletcher's The Skaters. The entire poem is an extended metaphor based on a single image- that of ice-skaters as they 'skim over the frozen river." Fletcher compares the skaters to 'black swallows,' and at the end of the poem describes the sound of their skating to 'the brushing together of thin wing-tips of silver." By beginning and ending with images of flight, Fletcher is surrounding the central image, that of the skaters, with the metaphor. By doing so, the poet is lending these brief lines a sense of neatness and completeness. It is this aspect of Imagist poetry that is described by M. Levenson when he states that 'every element of the work is an instrument of its effect." The brevity of the verse results in a necessary precision in the language; there is no room for superfluous details in this poem. If one is to maintain this sense of crispness to the text, 'language is no longer freely available for mere ornamental descriptions of reality,' and lengthy narrative styles become obsolete.
The poet H.D., one of the founders of the Imagist school along with Ezra Pound and Richard Aldington, was particularly noted for her sharp, direct style of poetry. She strove to think exclusively through images, and in her verses she presented 'no detail not germane to such thinking, no detail obligated merely by pictorial completeness." In this sense, her poem entitled 'Evening' is redolent of T. S. Eliot's 'heap of broken images." In H. D.'s description of a garden at sunset there is a distinct feel of fragmentation and obtuseness about the verses, which at times seems almost wilfully obscure:
The poem is written in vers libre: there is no ostensibly fixed rhyme scheme or rhythm. Therefore the line breaks, not determined by form, take on 'an integrity and function of [their] own." H.D. does not capitalize the beginning of each line, and makes little use of punctuation throughout the poem. Eliot called this rejection of any formulaic poetic structure the 'unperceived evasion of monotony." Changes in religious and scientific thinking, which had resulted from the works of Darwin in the nineteenth century, had placed a new emphasis on man as an individual rather than as part of the prevalent religious and social ideals of his time. 'Within an intellectual framework based on human autonomy, originality becomes the benchmark of human quality;' H. D is not conforming to what Modernists saw as the empty musicality of Victorian literature, the 'horrible agglomerate compost...a doughy mess of third-hand Keats, Wordsworth...fourth-hand Elizabethan sonority." She is instead asserting her 'claim to aesthetic dignity' by rejecting a style which 'had sold itself to a mass reading public." In common with the poems previously discussed, these are verses 'liberated from metaphysical and religious master-plans,' and as such are free to create and capture a mood rather than to tell a story.
It is clear, then, that the Imagist poets desired a complete break with tradition and, in doing so, strove to focus on capturing an exact image rather than telling interesting stories. They, like many involved with the Modernist movement, were 'reaffirming and fortifying the boundaries between art and mass culture;' a mass culture they 'construed as a threat of encroaching formlessness." As a Modernist writer, James Joyce was concerned with similar aesthetic ideals: those of focus not on content but on method, of brevity and accuracy in prose, of 'directness, verbal economy, and musicality." However, unlike the Imagist poems, Joyce's Dubliners does contain elements of an 'underlying theme or argument' that unfolds like a thread throughout the stories. It is for this reason that the critic Hugh Kenner argues that Dubliners is 'less a sequence of stories than a kind of multi-faceted novel." It is the theme of paralysis, introduced in the first of the stories and returned to in each, that serves as a 'unifying concern' throughout Dubliners. The main protagonists in each tale are 'trapped in limited domestic situations;' again and again escape is offered, only to be turned down. This can be seen, for example, in 'A Painful Case,' in which Mr James Duffey is offered the chance of companionship to relieve his futile and lonely existence. It is not until he hears of Mrs Sinico's death that he becomes fully aware of the misplaced 'rectitude of his life.'
Joyce repeats the latter phrase, stressing how Duffey has 'withheld life;' in Dubliners it was 'Joyce's intention to expose the spiritual decay of his countrymen and to caricature their afflicted souls." Therefore the motif of entrapment and paralysis is central to each story.
The changes to contemporary aesthetic ideals at the beginning of the nineteenth century can be interpreted as a 'late endeavour to come to terms with the rifts that were thrown open by modernity." Great social, economic and political turmoil caused writers to loose faith in the artistic conventions of the immediate past, and to look instead to the Greco-Roman period for inspiration. They 'disavowed their Romantic inheritance in order to assert their roots in an earlier tradition trumpeted as "classicism."' This 'Modernist contempt for popular culture' created a literary upheaval; one that dramatically changed the shape of the narrative form. The Imagist poets abandoned the idea of telling interesting stories in their poetry, instead adopting what Ezra Pound called 'laconic speech." It is this speech: 'objective - no slither - direct...straight as the Greek' - which allows the poets to capture so skilfully an exact mood or to present so faithful an image. In Dubliners Joyce adopts a similar 'generalization of unexpected exactness." His 'almost obsessive demand for accuracy,' and insistence that 'only the accurate fact ensured the meaning,' resulted in a style that moved away from traditional narratives packed with action and event, and towards presenting 'a single individual in the infinite labyrinth of his little life.'
 By not presenting the reader with a narrative, Joyce does not take his characters through several stages of development. He is free instead to concentrate on developing and capturing the complexity of the characters that we find in every story, presented as they are in a moment in time.