Unlike the Augustinian poets of the eighteenth century, who strove to provide a generalized picture of experience and emotion, and to bring out what an experience had in common with all other such experiences, the Romantic movement in the nineteenth-century placed an emphasis on confronting 'each reader individually, with a representation of the poet's individuality." At a time when 'mathematical thinking was the dominant intellectual mode' due to the influence of Isaac Newton's scientific findings, both William Wordsworth and William Blake strove to reach a more natural and humanistic state in their poetry, and to focus 'particularly on those aspects... which transcended or escaped the ordered patternings of mathematical form." During the nineteenth-century the state of childhood was linked to the 'tender infantile sentiment appropriate to that perennial image of meekness;' therefore in order to get back to what the poets considered to be a 'truer state of humanity' and closer to a child-like state it is natural that the Romantic Poets should hold up the image of youth as an ideal condition, in order to connect more deeply with their reading public.
The representation of childhood in the texts I am looking at is one of purity and goodness. The child is portrayed as a helpless victim in the face of the social ills which befall him or her, leading to great pain and suffering, and therefore the child is deserving of our pity and compassion. This has the effect of adding emotional depth to the works which otherwise may seem very simple in composition and style.
Romantic writers were greatly influenced by the changing political states during the eighteenth- and nineteenth-centuries. The French Revolution had a huge effect in stirring up revolutionary feeling and the opposing fear of revolution in England and, by enlarging horizons in politics and society, 'must have had an equally great effect in enlarging cultural- including poetic- horizons." This allowed writers to look closely at the more unpleasant elements in society that otherwise might have been glossed-over. However, an even greater effect was felt from the Industrial Revolution which had been taking place since 1770. Wordsworth saw the effect of the Industrial Revolution as the weakening of the 'bonds of domestic feeling among the poor,' due to the increase in mechanisation and the division of labour, both leading to a more socially and geographically mobile work force. This had resulted in a great increase in the marginalized and the dispossessed in society, particularly in the rapidly growing cities, and it was these elements in society that became the main focus of both Wordsworth and Coleridge's 'Lyrical Ballads' and Blake's 'Songs of Innocence and Experience.' However neither of the works are an explicit political analysis, and neither offer any form of alternative to the state of affairs at the time; instead the emphasis is on the emotional reactions created by social injustice.
Wordsworth and Blake can be said to have differing religious and social ideologies; Henry Crabb Robinson draws attention to 'the reproaches [Blake] continually cast on [Wordsworth's] worship of nature, which, in the mind of Blake, constituted Atheism." Indeed, Blake went so far as to state 'whoever believes in Nature disbelieves in God." This goes directly against Wordsworth's belief, influenced greatly by the pantheism of Samuel Taylor Coleridge, that 'truth to nature was the vital precondition for the exercise of poetic imagination." Wordsworth was 'devoted... to the more substantial spheres of natural beauty and personal feeling' in nature, rather than the worldliness of politics and materialism. Therefore, whilst the emphasis in 'The Lyrical Ballads' is on the perfection of the natural world, and more importantly, how transcendence may be achieved through contact with the natural world, in Blake's 'Songs of Innocence' and 'Songs of Experience ' the emphasis is much less on nature and more on human emotion, and specifically on the purity of youth. Despite this difference, the words of Samuel Taylor Coleridge go some way towards bridging the gap between the two poets, as he states that 'innocence and the very truth of Nature must go together." Therefore many common themes are seen in both poetical works.
In both Wordsworth and Blake's poetry emotion is used to great effect. Instead of simply telling the reader about human suffering and emotion, they are asking you to feel it. In Blake's 'The Chimney Sweeper,' ('Songs of Innocence') the poet 'makes the reader feel what the child does not." Therefore whilst Tom may be 'happy and warm' in the knowledge that 'if all do their duty, they need not feel harm,' we as readers are able to see the injustice in a society where a child is forced to state: 'so your chimneys I sweep, and in soot I sleep. This use of pathos has the effect, although not criticising the state of innocence, of making the reader aware of its limitations. Similarly, In Wordsworth's 'We are Seven,' the 'simple child' who may 'feel its life in every limb' is apparently incapable of facing the harsh reality and inflexibility of death. Whilst innocence is a state to be envied, it can be short-sighted in its vision and therefore is likely to be abused.
Critics have suggested that it was Blake's 'feeling of dissatisfaction with the public' that lead him to address children. Indeed Blake, like Coleridge, showed considerable frustration with 'the worst effects of habitual novel reading,' and was compelled to state:
By addressing his 'Songs' to the child, it is like Blake is addressing the uncorrupted, and he shows a 'chameleon-like sympathy with childlike feelings." John Beer states that 'his most lucid verses are also those which are most gratifying to the sentimental,' and it is by appealing to a reader's compassion and sentiment that Blake's verse has such a powerful effect. This pathos is clear in 'The Chimney Sweeper,' found in 'Songs of Experience.' The opening lines:
Immediately create a sense of pity for the child, and by focusing on the marginalised in society Blake is poignantly drawing our attention to the suffering. He uses both alliteration and assonance in the second line with 'weep' and 'woe,' drawing out the vowel sounds to engage the emotion of the reader and to accentuate the pitiable situation of the chimney sweeper. This is a poem which demands feelings of empathy towards the protagonist. Blake is pointing out 'the state of innocence and its relationship to the protective but potentially restrictive adult' in this poem, showing how over-zealous but ultimately misguided parents can do great 'injury' to their children by putting the idea of a 'higher good' before the individual. This underpins the idea that youth can be corrupted and ultimately destroyed by age and experience. However, as readers we must be cautious of treating 'innocence' and 'experience' as implying opposition; instead, Duncan Wu suggests that we 'think of the two groups as engaging in dialogue." It is Blake's 'ability to juxtapose different ways of responding to the same situation that characterizes 'Songs of Innocence' and the corresponding lyrics in 'Songs of Experience.'
In his 'Songs' Blake is rejecting the longer Epic style of poetry, seen in works such as 'The Book of Urizen,' in favour of brief, lyrical, more accessible poetic forms. By adapting popular (rather than poetic) forms, Blake has the effect of emphasizing the 'intensity and purity of childhood vision' and leading Alexander Gilchrist to state that as we read Blake's 'Songs' 'fugitive glimpses open...of our buried childhood." Both he and Wordsworth avoided periphrasis in these poetic works, striving instead for language that was simple and unelaborated, but from the heart. Blake was said to be 'passionately committed to the tragedy of their period,' and it is by drawing attention to this 'tragedy' of undeserved suffering in simple, unadorned language that he is attempting to encourage others to recognise the ills in society.
The image of the child was widely used in Romantic Literature to represent extreme innocence and purity. Building on the words of the Bible, in which the uncorrupted nature of a child is taken as the ideal:
William Blake uses childhood as a starting point by which to connect more meaningfully with a common core of experience within the reading public. The sentiments expressed in the above psalm are echoed in 'Infant Joy,' in which he stresses the simple joy of a tiny infant 'but two days old.' The brief time that the child has spent in the world means that it has not yet been corrupted, and we can see the child in its most natural state: that of happiness. The structure of the poem reinforces the simplicity of the infant's feeling, with the brevity of the stanzas, the simple rhyme scheme of 'a, b, c, d, d, c,' and the repetition of 'Sweet joy." The 'Songs' have been described as 'unfinished poems,' and it is this deceptive simplicity, shielding works of 'social and political protest,' which gives them their power.
In his poetry Blake is able to lay emphasis on the god-like qualities he saw in mankind. In 'A Cradle Song' Blake refers to 'soft down' weaving an 'infant crown;' this echoes images of Christ and a milder version of the crown of thorns. Similarly, in the fifth stanza the lines:
Again reinforces the image of the Christ Child. This image is completed in the concluding stanzas, when Blake makes his comparison between a baby and Christ explicit:
This is reflective of Blake's experience of the Swedenborgian faith, which states that 'God is a man; all angels and spirits are men in a perfect form.' However Blake eventually rejected this faith as it became increasingly institutionalised, and is using the image of childhood purity - suggesting that to be childlike is the real godlike state. The fact that the message of this poem echoes the Biblical quote shows that 'no one was more caught up in the ideological, religious and intellectual currents of the day' than Blake himself.
Coleridge and Wordsworth's 'Lyrical Ballads', like Blake's 'Songs,' are largely spoken by the marginalised element in society. Indeed, In Blake's poetry we see 'the very metre and trick of style adopted by Wordsworth...in the 'Lyrical Ballads." Wordsworth takes pains to show us the beauty of youth; he describes a boy in 'Anecdote for Fathers' as 'cast in beauty's mould' and as having a face 'fair and fresh to see." Similarly, in 'We are Seven' a young girl is 'very fair' and 'her beauty made [Wordsworth] glad.' By idealising youth in this way, Wordsworth is furthering the idea of the childhood state being pure and uncorrupted.
A different representation of the child-like state is seen in Wordsworth's 'The Idiot Boy." In this poem the central protagonist is an 'idiot boy,' whom Wordsworth defends and even accords an exulted status. 'I have often applied to idiots... that sublime expression of scripture that, "their life is hidden with God."' Therefore the fact that Johnny Foy remains in a childlike state through adulthood is a blessing, because it affords him a closeness to God unattainable to the adults around him. Wordsworth talks of Johnny 'in his glory' and he is at no point criticised in the poem for failing to do as he was asked and fetch the doctor. This reinforces the representation of a childlike state as being one close to a godlike state, seen in the poetry of Blake.
In Blake's poetry, and also in the narrative of slavery, 'The History of Mary Prince,' we are given the idea of the child as voiceless, and the author as giving voice to their sufferings. Mary Price states: 'All slaves want to be free- to be free is very sweet." Mary Prince also stresses the innocence of children in her 'History,' by repeatedly referring to her ignorance of her position as a child: 'I was too young to understand rightly my condition as a slave." In many ways Mary Prince's narrative is formulaic, showing many of the 'common elements' set down in 'I was born a slave." As such, it presents many aims in common with other narratives of slavery, that is, to document the conditions of slavery, to encourage social change, and to persuade the reader of the evils of being enslaved. In Mary Prince's account we are presented with a relatively ideal and innocent childhood snatched away by the realities of slave life. It was 'the happiest period' of her life, in which she was 'too full of spirits to look forward to the days of toil and sorrow,' In this way Prince sets up an opposition between the beauty and innocence of childhood and the pain and toil associated with adulthood. This is an idea used in Blake's 'Holy Thursday' in 'Songs of Experience.' He states:
These lines show the unjustness of a world in which children are forced to suffer at the hands of selfish adults. The adults in Mary Prince's account show no pity for the state of childhood; when she was just twelve years old Prince was 'licked, flogged, and pinched' at the pleasure of her mistress, 'whether the children were behaving well or ill." Therefore whilst in both Blake and Wordsworth's poetry youth is something to be cherished and respected, in Mary Prince's world it gained no distinction from adulthood.
'To "delight and instruct" were two standard aims of many eighteenth- and nineteenth-century narrative works' and this aim is clear in both Blake's and Wordsworth's poetry. However this objective is not made explicit in 'The History.' In this respect slave narratives differ from the greater body of texts from the Romantic Movement, because their aims were more unambiguously political. The closing lines of Prince's narrative: 'call loud to the great King of England, till all the poor blacks be given free' make this clear.
The Romantic Wars, as well as the Industrial Revolution, were causing great suffering amongst the poorer demographics in English society at the beginning of the nineteenth-century, and it can be argued that this was a huge contributing factor in compelling the writers I have mentioned above to put their thoughts down in texts. This can be seen in the many war-wounded characters that feature in Wordsworth's poetry, such as in 'The Female Vagrant,' and 'Old Man Travelling." In order to increase the emotional effect these writings are to have on readers, the use of the child is fundamental, as you cannot argue that it is the actions of the child itself that has lead to their pitiable situation. Therefore by representing a child as being all that is pure, good, and innocent, and using that image to elicit sympathy in the reading public, Blake, Wordsworth, and Prince are appealing to their audiences' better natures and, particularly in Prince's case, calling for social change.