The report aims to identify through research whether Canada is a suitable market for a British hospitality company to enter and expand its business.
UK based boutique hotel in the countryside was established in 1989, and is planning an expansion to Canada. After a successful operation in the UK the hotel was rolled out across other countries during the next 16 years. Currently is operating in five European countries and the United States. One unit runs in each European country and three units in the US; all are discretely sized properties. The same brand name is utilized across all countries: Finesse Boutique Hotels (FBH). All the properties have a special identity adapted to the culture of each country while offering a unique atmosphere, charm, authenticity and calm everywhere in a beautiful scenic mountainside or countryside setting. As being such a huge success in the United States the company decided to expand and make presence in Canada, where nature is outstanding with its huge mountains and lakes. It is an interesting place for the company to explore because environmental scanning of Canada suggested that it could be an easy environment to get in, in the view of more similarities with the UK than differences. Canada is the world's second largest country, rich in natural resources. The country profile compiled by Datamonitor (2003) states: "Canadians are rightly proud of their tradition of tolerance, openness and stability", which suggests that they are a welcoming nation. It can be considered as an attractive market, because it is politically stable, economically very well developed, accounting for the seventh largest economy in the world (see Appendix 2 for details).
International marketing intends to offer a product tailored to the needs of the local customers within a global framework (Usunier and Lee, 2005). Therefore it is necessary to recognise the needs and interest of the customers one aims to offer their product to. The main characteristics of FBH are personalised, high quality service, relaxing ambience, pampering spa treatments, fine wines and fine dining, all of which created and delivered with attention to detail. Therefore the targeted segment is a specialised niche, luxury market with high education and high disposable income, health awareness and aged between 25-55.
The research suggests that the negative affects on Canada's hospitality industry are demolishing and tourism is taking a positive turn in 2005 which is fully expected to flourish and develop, future outlook is promising. Niche markets are small at current but showing increase as specific interest is more and more the leading driver for demand. The extensive spread of the World Wide Web creates a great opportunity for customers to browse for the best deals when looking for a holiday destination which is undoubtedly a marketing challenge. The 2010 Winter Olympic Games will draw the world's attention to British Columbia and especially Whistler and Blackcomb area where it will take place. There will be a great presence of media from around the world, which is a big opportunity for tourism and hospitality industries and for FBH to benefit from such a global event. FBH will make an arrangement to be a sponsor of the Games and will work out professional marketing plans in order to create special offers, packages and be prepared to accommodate sport stars taking part in the event.
Canada is continuing to be among the top ten destinations in the world (Loverseed, 2005), the challenge for the hotel and tourism industry and within it the FBH is to create a bright image of the country, a new 'Canada brand' that will make it successful with its admirable nature and differentiate itself from the competitors.
Overall Canada can be considered as a suitable market for UK-based Finesse Boutique Hotels to enter.