The current era is ruled by technology (Peacock, 1995), technological innovations appear in one's life on a daily basis; this includes information technology and the Internet. The world has moved from pre-Internet age to the Internet age, where the World Wide Web has a major importance in all areas of one's life.
The theoretical concept and principles of the Internet were created essentially by three individuals and a research conference in 1956 (Internet History, 2005). Through technological development, research and implementing the visions of scientists there was a use of networking protocols in the 1980s. There were networks (ARPANET, National Science Foundation Network, and Computer Science Network) which connected the Universities in North America and then EUnet (European Network) connected Europe's research centres and Universities in 1990. ARPANET is the first internet that evolved to the one which is in use today. The use of the Internet increased quickly after 1990 and the US Government appointed independent internet management organizations starting in 1995 to work together in managing, researching and developing the Internet.
Electronic commerce through the World Wide Web is gaining importance whether buying or selling products and services. The travel and tourism industry is not an exception.
In the coursework three different electronic tourism distribution channels are being evaluated and discussed both from consumer and supplier perspective. The same travel package is analysed from three different providers which are the aggregator (tour operator) and integrator (travel agent) and the principals (airlines, hotels and car hire company) themselves.
There is a need for clarifying special terms and explain definitions from different authors in the literature.
The Internet is defined by Peter Drucker (2002 cited in Turban et al. , 2004 p. 3) as 'the major, worldwide distribution channel for goods, for services, and for managerial and professional jobs', which has a major changing affect on the organization of the industry, market segmentation, consumer behaviour and the continuous supply of products and services. The Internet thus enables people to buy and sell through a world wide network. This action can be considered as conducting business on electronic grounds- electronic commerce (EC). The method of buying, selling, and exchanging goods, services and information via computer networks is called EC (Turban et al., 2004). This retail is supported by supply channels.
A distribution channel for travel and tourism whether it is related to traditional travel agents or Web sites is defined by Middleton (2001, p. 292.) as 'any organized and serviced system, paid out of marketing budgets and created or utilized to provide convenient points of sale and/ or access to consumers, away from the location of production and consumption'. However other authors argue that this definition ignores some activities undertaken by distribution channels. These are 'promotion and market research' (Buhalis and Laws, 2001, p. 332) and also the information supplying role of distribution channels. These aspects are vital in the tourism industry as customers need information for motivation to travel and for making a decision for the purchase of the tourism produce. O'Connor and Frew (2002), Buhalis and Laws (2001) stress the importance of it by stating that information is the 'lifeblood' of tourism; especially because of the intangible and perishable character of its products. Consumers need the information to fill the gap between their expectation and experience.
Hotels need to use various distribution channels (O'Connor and Frew, 2002) including the emerging electronic ones. The role of information technology in tourism is of a high importance as it enables customers to find the information and to purchase the product at the same place. This facility saves costs, time and is very convenient for the customers and suppliers at the same time.
As mentioned earlier distribution costs are covered from the marketing budget in any travel and tourism organization and it is the largest cost element of this budget thus there is a great interest and investment in the Internet (Middleton and Clarke, 2001).
The importance of Global Distribution Systems (GDS) must not be ignored even in the internet era as O'Connor and Frew (2002, p. 41) state after their analysis of individual channels that 'the continuing importance of the GDS from the industry perspective is clearly evident'. Examples for GDSs are: Amadeus, Galileo, Sabre, Worldspan.
Computerized Reservation Systems (CRS) are in use in all large business for customer database, enquiries and bookings (Middleton and Clarke, 2001). CRS is the main player in the distribution process.
The Switch used to create the electronic connection between the GDSs and CRSs.
The role of search engines is another aspect that needs to be looked at. Over 80% of web users find information on the World Wide Web with the help of search engines (Chaffey et al., 2003). This data suggests that they have a great importance from consumer point of view. From supplier perspective this fact means that companies who wish to be the ones that are visited most frequently with large number of customers they need to position themselves high on the search engine list, preferably within the first page. Danny Sullivan, editor of Search Engine Watch suggests for companies to create a 'short, attractive, enticing title tag' which will benefit buyers and sellers at the same time. Search engine (SE) 'provides an index of content on registered sites that can be searched by keyword' (ibid, p. 345-346.). Examples of SE on the Internet are: Google, Ask Jeeves, AltaVista, Lycos, Mamma, Profusion etc.
Electronic distribution is facilitated through intermediaries such as tour operators and travel agents on one hand and through principals on the other.
Intermediary is any third party that enables purchases (Middleton and Clarke, 2001), acting as a middleman between the producer and consumer. Destination Management Organizations (DMO) are considered as intermediaries. Disintermediation is the act of taking the middleman out of the distribution chain; the producers are dealing directly with the final consumers.
There is a need to mention the role of infomediaries at this stage. Infomediaries are new forms of intermediaries (Middleton and Clarke, 2001) that provide the information but transfer customers to intermediaries or principals when they wish to book a holiday or purchase a product. Examples are: Kelkoo, Travelzoo and Traveljungle.
Intermediaries can act both as aggregators or integrators. Aggregators are satisfying average consumers within the targeted segment. Tour operators can be considered as aggregators as they offer packages that are built in advance and the deal is to take the package as it is, however it may not satisfy individual aspects and personal demand. For example: Voyages Jules Verne, Globus, Cosmos etc. are aggregators.
Integrators are aiming to meet individual needs. In tourism industry these are the travel agents who are able to provide tailor-made packages designed to special requirements and individual interests. Examples for electronic integrators are: Expedia, Travelocity, and Ebookers. However they can act as aggregators as well at the same time depending on the offer they propose.
Principals- are the companies themselves who offer the product directly to the customer. There is no middleman between the supplier and consumer. These are hotels, airlines, different visitor attractions that are emerging with their own Web sites.
Nevertheless the boundaries between all these suppliers- aggregators, integrators and principals- are starting to blur. In order to stay competitive they might have to be very versatile and try to satisfy different needs in the near future rather than concentrate on average demand.
This concludes a channel conflict about 'who owns the customer'. The distribution channels used to depend on each other and thus work in cooperation with each other; however nowadays they are competing with each other. As the traditional bookings were made through two channels, one was providing the necessary information and the other used to carry out the transaction (O'Connor and Frew, 2002). Electronic-based systems play both roles, making it more convenient and less expensive to put together a booking and purchase for a holiday in a shorter time as well.
Online buyer behaviour needs to be taken into account when creating internet marketing strategy. In order to satisfy specific needs and to design appealing products, marketers need to gain as much information about their target markets as possible. There are different models of online consumer behaviour created by various authors. Lewis and Lewis (1997 cited in Chaffey et al. , 2003) identified five categories of people using the Internet:
undirected information seekers, who are only surfing on the internet
directed information seekers, who know exactly what they are looking for
directed buyers visit the site with an intention to buy specific product or service
bargain hunters look for the best deals
entertainment seekers use the Internet for joy and games.
Another approach was developed by Styler (2001 cited in Chaffey et al. , 2003) who believes there are four types of customers:
In the same year Kothari et al. (cited in Chaffey et al. , 2003) proposed a segmentation based on the level of brand knowledge and on the fact whether one is searching specific information or only 'surfing' on the World Wide Web. They identified:
From supplier point of view these authors suggest that one must consider these different behaviours and decide on a target market in order to design a Web site and provide appealing information and navigation assistance according to the level of specific audience (Chaffey et al., 2003). For example business-to-business sites should consider that most of their consumers will be information seekers and buyers mainly.
Many chief executives of leading e-commerce companies agree that loyalty is an economically and competitively essential attribute (Reichheld and Schefter, 2000) as attaining new customers is extremely costly and long-term profits highly depend on customer loyalty.
Trust is stressed mostly when talking about electronic commerce. As customers cannot see and touch the products they buy therefore they need trust in the Web site in order to share their personal details with the suppliers. Many people believe that price is the only reason that drives customers to buy products and services online; indeed on the contrary research indicates the opposite. Reichheld and Schefter carried out a survey in their companies and the results confirmed the earlier statement that people will only buy from a Web site they 'know and trust' (2000, p. 106) and 'price does not rule the Web, trust does'. When customers trust a site there is a bigger chance that they will give their personal details.
The authors carry on saying that another great advantage of online purchases is that shopping patterns of customers are transparent, and can be tracked by each click they make while in traditional retailing this is not really possible (unless tracking their credit card payments, which except for credit card issuers is not a possibility for companies). This feature makes it extremely easy for marketers to get to know their consumers and offer them products and services according to their preferences and shopping habits. However Reichheld and Schefter (2000) found that less than 20% of the online companies take advantage of this opportunity thus neglecting chances of up selling.
Finally the design of a Web site should be customer-oriented. Chaffey et al. (2003, p. 288) suggest that information should be: personalised, easy to find, timely, up to date, accurate, clear, detailed and relevant. These are the aspects that consumers appreciate and make them 'stick' to a Web site. If they find easily what they are looking for and the content is recent and clear with offered explanations when necessary, they will be satisfied and visit again.
The WAI Web Content Accessibility Guidelines consist of fourteen general principles of accessible design (W3, 2005). There are three identified priority levels, divided into checkpoints:
The priority one checkpoints are expected to be all met by the online companies in order to make their Web site accessible to a wide range of people, including those with certain levels of disability, who are potential customers.
This leads to identifying the customers of the coursework by describing the customer profile. The travel package is chosen for a young couple aged 27 (lady) and 32 (gentleman), empty nesters, who are belonging to group 'A' in socio-economic aspect. They are highly educated and health conscious, with a great deal of disposable income deriving from their high positions in their jobs. The purpose of their travel is a birthday treat for the gentlemen as a surprise from his fiance. It is a leisure holiday however not once in a lifetime trip, moreover as the gentleman is motivated for Thailand, mainly because of its culture and gastronomy this is planned to be the first of the many trips in the future.
Activities at the destination are planned to be mainly dining out in fine restaurants in Phuket and Bangkok, exploring the fresh fruit and fish markets and relaxing at the beach in Phuket enjoying local speciality cocktails. These activities are not included in the package, as it is supposed be a surprise organized by the fiance, she intends to leave some power in the decision-making for the gentleman, and thus they will decide on activities together at the two destinations.
It is a two centre holiday, and their budget is  1.800 for the travel itself including accommodation and an extra  700 for activities at the destination, total of  2.500.
Explanation of travel package characteristics
The use of the Internet in terms of distribution is emerging; however customers will still need personal assistance and will appreciate physical points of sale at the same time as on-line sales. They can then decide on the most suitable option for themselves and the method they wish to deal with a company. On the company side the combination of all features mentioned earlier will add value to their services. Yet there is a definite need for improvement in terms of Web site design.
As the boundaries between all the different distribution channels are starting to blur, in the future all companies will be 'multigrators' (Bowie et al. , 2005) with diverse functionality in order to be able to please all segments and offer customised products with great deal of flexibility. As consumers are getting knowledgeable and experienced they will have the power to opt for the companies that best suit them. Thus to gain loyalty of customers will be very challenging from marketing point of view and will be vital for long-term benefits.
Online distribution will rise in popularity; however the Internet will be a tool to complement the traditional elements of it.