Wilmot's Indeed, at times similar linguistic devices are employed by the poets, yet they are utilised in different ways in order to create rather quite unique effects.
Armitage's poem takes the form of a sonnet, which is immediately indicative of love, yet the way in which the poem is written is certainly far from the traditional sonnets of Shakespeare and such like, and lacks the romantic aspect of the traditional verse. Instead, Armitage's poem is rife with colloquial language at its simplicity from the very beginning with The only deviation from the simplicity of Armitage's language is in line eight, where he declares: In effect, Armitage's general divergence from the conventional form emulates the atypical way in which he sought to win the affection of the girl he was in love with at the tender age of thirteen; this coupled with the simple language mimics the inability of a child at this age to display their affections appropriately as well as dealing with such emotions. After all, it is symptomatic of a child to often be nasty to someone that they admire.
On the other hand, Wilmot's poem incorporates a regular rhyme scheme, iambic tetrameter and masculine rhyme. Effectively, the use of these poetical features makes Wilmot's poem more regular in the traditional sense, yet like Armitage, his subject matter isn't necessarily reflective of the general consensus nor traditional. Seemingly, Wilmot is an exponent of the debauched lifestyle with regard to relationships, demonstrated firstly by the clear distinction he makes between himself and his mistress,
Wilmot's gulf between himself and his mistress reveals a lack of commitment; in addition, he seems to make a further distinction between his mistress and other women, deeming them This mockery of women who are not adulterous, who instead of "dispensing favours" remain loyal is further reiterated by the sarcastic way in which Wilmot utters how they Again, as with Armitage, Wilmot's poem reflects an air of sarcasm thus making them similar in this respect.
Armitage, as already mentioned, keeps the language in his poem simple and diverges from the use of elaborate diction; in fact, he uses no similes or metaphors, but instead seems to rely upon tapping into the reader's senses, through the use of tactile, visual and auditory imagery. For example, the visual imagery of On a different note, It is here that we see a clear distinction between the commitment evident in Armitage's poem - albeit demonstrated in a peculiar fashion - and the lack of commitment expressed in Wilmot's poem. Furthermore, tactile imagery such as the image of her slipping her 'thumb and middle finger in' and 'branded skin' are again quite powerful, as well as the auditory imagery of calling upon her name. Armitage's sensory imagery seems to replace any complex poetic language and is effective due to the fact that it is in keeping with the simplicity of the poem as a whole.
Armitage's simplicity couldn't be further from Wilmot's perhaps superfluous diction; however this isn't to suggest that Wilmot's poem is a normal love poem at all. His references to
As already mentioned, Wilmot's poem benefits from an identifiable structure, incorporating rhyme and thus rhythm; effectively this gives the poem an air of jauntiness which is parallel to the approach Wilmot seems to be taking with regard to love and sex, where one should not be confined and restricted but free and hedonistic. The lines of each stanza are insured to follow the tetrameter of the poem given that Wilmot uses elision to shorten longer words, such as
Unlike Armitage, Wilmot does use more linguistic devices, such as the personification of the Earth's Furthermore, Wilmot uses simile to describe the Again, this echoes the idea of liberated love due to the reference to nature and the connotations that such an allusion would evoke. In fact, this image of nature is extended due to the lexical cluster relating to the
Although both Armitage and Wilmot share similarities, a comparison of their poems seems to serve the purpose of intensifying the effects of the other and makes evident the lucid difference between their views. In fact, the ending of both poems bears witness to this. The finality of Wilmot's last few lines comes to a clear conclusion in that his mistress should be the