When we talk about the 1930s in terms of social history, we often refer to the strong emergence of ideology into the public domain. Moreover, for Latin American countries, the first half of the twentieth century marked the coming of 'modernity'. Other factors, however, such as immigration and a rumbling social hierarchy in the aftermath of slavery, tended to influence society in more informal ways. Self-representation through culture was usually closest at hand for the lower classes, and often provided a colourful means of communicating a multi-faceted message. In this essay we shall look at such cultural representations in Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, and assess the extent to which they contributed to the construction of a national identity. Naturally, art forms such as dance and music were, even though powerful, not the only way of expressing one's national sentiments. The first films with sound managed to reach a mass audience and demonstrated what it was like to be a true Argentine, or Brazilian, in a light package. Moreover, the aftermath of key political events (Argentina, the 'infamous decade' after the fall of Yrigoyen; Brazil, the 1930 coup of Vargas; Mexico, the heritage of the revolution) and the subsequent split among the people brought a new literature of thinkers focussing with urgency upon 'national character and the metaphysics of the Mexican, Argentinian or Brazilian 'being''. The assessment of each country's culture climate thus provides interesting insights into the attempts made at a culturally constructed nationhood.
The Argentina of the 1930s saw increasing modernisation and a changing political climate. This did not leave the notion of nationalism untouched; and, after the social positivism of the Irigoyen government that was overthrown in 1930, cultural representations of the Argentine nation became increasingly ambiguous. The 'Dcada Infame' brought a reconsideration of Argentine patriotism and the essence of 'Argentineness'. A new definition of the Argentine identity proved, however, not quite unproblematic. A nation of immigrants, Argentina had many faces and was, with the coming of further modernity and political maturing of the masses, thrust into a further set of cultural disparities. These were based upon dichotomies as varied as those of machismo versus feminism, the European-orientated metropolitan versus the patriotic gaucho, and that of the definition of a high culture versus that of commercially formed mass culture. Essentially, thus, the concept of argentinidad was politically and culturally utilised in a multitude of ideological representations: 'The references to a collective ideal of the argentinidad were continuous [...], although this ideal was defined in the most imprecise way and was basically the product of the whims and wishful thinking of the ideologues who wrote on the subject, more than an ideal that could be identified empirically as a trait of Argentina's culture'.
An early elaboration upon Argentine culture and its forms can be found in Sarmiento's Facundo of 1845. Sarmiento, Argentina's president between 1868 and 1874, regarded the countryside, inhabited by the mestizo gaucho Argentine, as uncivilized, chaotic - even barbarous: 'dirty children covered in rags, living amid packs of dogs; men stretched out on the ground, in utter inactivity; filth and poverty everywhere'. The country's biggest cities, on the contrary, contained every aspect 'that characterizes cultured people'. Later, the popular poem about Martn Fierro created a distinction between the good, heroic and patriotic gaucho, and the barbarous and violent bad gaucho. The early twentieth century thereafter saw a complete rehabilitation of the gaucho icon, when it was presented as an example of argentinidad in an increasingly immigrant-dominated society. This was, however, merely a constructed and idealised identity, and the by the end of the twenties, the plurality of immigrant cultures were gaining space from more traditional social and cultural dance clubs with names like 'The Patriotic Gauchos'. In its stead came a new form of dance, less courteous and more fitting in the context of the big metropolis Buenos Aires: tango.
The thirties in Argentina were marked by modernising development from above and from below. The tango started its ascending popularity from below. A dance of immigrants, it was originally popular in the packed, miserable and crime-ridden suburbs of Buenos Aires. Its association with knife-fighting and gangs was famously put into words in Borges' short story 'Streetcorner Man' of 1933. In it, two gang leaders head into confrontation on an illegal tango party.
These aspects - machismo, violence, illegitimacy, made dancing the tango into a rebellious act, associated with characters on the edge of society, devoid of patriotic virtue or morality. This was soon to change, as the tango was brought to Europe and became popular in the salons of avant-garde Paris. Before this shift, the tango only gained marginal recognition as a truly Argentine metropolitan dance, as in the poem 'Milonga' by Oliverio Girondo.
A second exponent of tango, nevertheless, soon found through tango a new formula for political criticism, woven into poetical lyrics. The song 'Cambalache' by Enrique Santos Discpolo, written in the early thirties, counterposed the liberal positivistic nationalism with a gloomy, destructive view of the new Argentina. 'Those that don't cry don't feed', Santos sang, 'and those that don't steal are fools'.
Despite this loathing with politics, the middle class adopted the tango as an aspect of the new, dynamic and modern culture that Argentina was now adopting. In this, the cinema played a big, yet not unambiguous role. Argentina was steadily adopting the Northern American cinema culture. In 1930, around a thousand film screens could be found throughout the country. However, already by 1926 an estimated 95 percent of screen time was filled by films from the United States. Tango reached a mass audience when sound was added to cinema films, and a number of glamorous films with appealing tunes lent this formula its great success. Unfortunately this also caused tango to become a mass cultural phenomenon, alienated from its former basis of charismatic metropolitanism. By the late thirties, fifty such films were produced a year, also serving as a charming and successful export product for other Latin American countries.
While the metropolitan immigrant gained commercial ground and mass appeal, other cultural forces were working from above, posing questions at a more political and intellectual level. X-Ray of the Pampa was published in 1933, melancholically referring back to inner country Argentina as a real source of Argentine national identity. In the essay, Ezequiel Martnez Estrada accused the central government in the metropolitan centre of cultivating city values at the cost of the 'countryside, which is full of truth and life'. Minority immigrant groups, faced by the dominance and lack of understanding of the overwhelmingly Catholic Hispanic cultural majority, attempted to secure themselves a place within the Argentine identity. Jews, who were often particularly victim of racism, attempted, with relative success, to bring the issue to attention in the theatre. A number of Jewish playwrights wrote plays on Argentine Jewish families and their cultural problems, with strategies varying from the complete abandonment of any distinctive Jewish identity', to the incorporation [...] of Argentina's many immigrant groups, their concerns and their idioms'. The playwright Csar Tiempo in 1937 even won a prestigious theatre prize for one such play with a light-hearted tone, Pan criollo [Native Bread].
The literature of Jorge Luis Borges forms a totally separate category in Argentina's intellectual life of the thirties. Whilst his outlook towards nationalism was complicated and peculiar, both the political left and right came to agree 'that what the fictions display is mastery'. Initially, Borges became part of the capital's avant-garde poetry circle, whose most famous representative was Oliverio Girondo, and his first published poems still breathe the excitement of metropolitan life. By the 1930s, however, Borges came to reject Martn Fierro's nativistic idea of argentinidad as well as the avant-garde as 'infantile disorders'. Perhaps due to some drastic changes in Borges' life over the second half of the thirties, among which the death of his father, a short period of serious illness and a mindless job as a librarian, Borges increasingly came to see all experiences as individual. Increasingly, Borges disapproved of simplistic, mono-cultured concepts of Argentine nationalism, in which some groups were downplayed in favour of others. Instead, he proposed that
This deconstructionist view of argentinidad cut short all aspirations toward an inward-looking, 'authentic' national identity, and hence, Borges later came to be regarded as an early exponent of postmodernism. Throughout the 1930s, Borges was still very much in search of new values, comparing the Argentine with the Jew, whom, according to him both had no 'particular national tradition', while the entrenchment in a narrow set of national values was 'negative, or, at the very least, uncreative'. Soon, he would move on to a path of displacing, often surprising literary creations, revealing elements of both ironic genius as elitism.
The 1930s as a definable decade for Brazil started in October 1930, when a group of young army officers overthrew the long-standing So Paulo oligarchy and brought GetlioVargas to power - a dictatorship that was to last until 1954. This inaugurated an era of modernisation to the country, and a new search for a national identity. Gradually, art forms and cultural expressions of the lowest classes (in Brazil this mainly meant the former slaves) became accepted by a wider public, and eventually even representative as national symbols. Dances like the samba and capoeira and the carnival of Rio de Janeiro - though often in commercialised and regularised forms- now became celebrated aspects of the Brazilian national identity. The film genre of the chanchada came hereby to play an important role, as it familiarised people from the cities with the cultural life of the favelas, the neighbourhoods of the poor black people, revealing 'its misery and at the same time its tremendous beauty'. Literature and poetry, on the contrary, became increasingly politicised throughout the thirties. Already in 1931, many of the writers in the Modernist movement were aware of the ideological clash that the Vargas government was driving the cultural community into. This drove a number of intellectuals to the Communists' side and often into imprisonment, as they presented a 'proletarian nation' in their work. The most lasting national cultural legacy, nonetheless, comes from the bambas of the favelas.
While in the early decades of the twentieth century public concerts of samba were out of question, the 1930s marked a slow shift toward toleration of the music and dance. Whereas previously lovers of samba 'had to sing it far from the police', gradually a case was being made for acceptance of "black" art forms. Amidst the still prevalent racism in Brazil, Gilberto Freyes presented his theory of 'racial democracy' in 1933 with the publishing of his book The Masters and the Slaves. In it, Freyes argued that the contribution of Afro Brazilians added to the rich cultural mix in which Brazilian tradition was embedded. It has been argued, in fact, that consumption of Afro Brazilian food and music were already prevalent among all classes in a discrete sense since the nineteenth century. However, now supported by the state, who saw in the lower classes an important element for the maintenance of the status quo, the samba culture increasingly gained space in the public sphere. The gatherings and parties held in the house of Tia Ciata have been said to serve as a microcosmic example of Brazilian society. Each room in her house had different musical genre performances, with in the front rooms -near to the street- respectable dances such as the polka, and toward the back samba and percussive, "ethnic" rhythms. Over time, as the samba gained momentum and respectability, it started to refine and develop in a multitude of exponents. Fusing African rhythms and European tonal scales into a more accessible style, the samba now became acceptable for the wealthier white classes.
Central to the samba scene in the favelas were the batuqueiros, or bambas. These dancers performed the capoeira, a self-defence technique disguised as a dance, which had been developed by runaway slaves. In street carnivals, where performers paraded through the streets, the bambas were singled out for their particular talent for improvised dancing. As the carnival was becoming bigger, it became also more organised. So-called Escolas de Samba (samba schools) started to predominate the street carnival, now participating in officially organised competitions for monetary prizes and social recognition. Thus, gradually, the samba culture came to serve as a means for increasing respectability and social mobility, with the samba schools as benefactors of neighbourhoods, bringing education and increasing unity in Rio de Janeiro.
Whether empowering the black lower classes, or simply reducing their contribution to 'the picturesque and the folkloric', sure is that samba contributed to Brazilian nation-building as it transcended the regional differences and immensely varying dialects. Over time, the samba thus became a national symbol. The production of Brazilian films brought a major contribution in the transformation of samba into a mass culture, and thus to some extent in the emancipation of black Brazilians. With the coming of sound in films, the most popular film genre became, as had been the case in Argentina, a light story incorporating popular songs. The Brazilian version of such films was the chanchada, which, although never entirely unambiguous, has been described in its widest sense as 'the generic name given to all the comedies and musical comedies, with popular pretensions'. As could be expected, Rio de Janeiro emerged as the centre of Brazilian cinema in the 1930s, closely linked to the samba schools and the carnivals, in the sense that chanchada films embraced similar values and were often released around the time of carnival. In films such as Al Al Brasil (1935), featuring Brazilian film star Carmen Miranda, and Al Al Carnaval (1936), featuring her sister Aurora, blacks played minor roles as musicians in the songs. The presence of blacks in chanchadas, however marginal, were rather significant as they meant the open incorporation of "black culture" in Brazilian national culture.
The extent to which the Vargas government influenced the incorporation of samba culture is blurred. Although Vargas showed some minor active support for the movement by founding the National Institute of Educational Film (INCE) in 1937, which was to serve national integration, this institute was actually short-lived, while the number of long feature films decreased toward the end of the decade. Moreover, the culture of the favelas brought with it the 'dialectic of malandragem', which was a concept of using the established order for illegal interests and to avoid 'the punishment of work'. Malandragem attempted to function alongside the order of society, thus obscuring the brisk line between order and disorder. It is therefore likely that these cultural shifts were rather a wave that accompanied the emancipation of the former slave classes than a conscious attempt at nation-building for the Estado Novo.
Traditional high culture in Brazil's thirties was preoccupied with another struggle, that against the right-wing dictatorship. Much of the intelligentsia and artistic scene, united in the Popular Front, chose the direction of regionalism. Upper class painter Tarsila do Amaral, after having explored aspects in Brazilian nativism in her work, now started to focus on representing traditional every-day scenes of the countryside. According to Gilberto Freyes, the 'soul of Brazil' was to be sought in the rural north, which was struck by poverty and where many sugar plantations were situated. The regionalist movement, however, incorporated a wide range of ideologies opposed to the Vargas regime. Raquel de Queirs, in 1930 published Back in '15, a novel on the plight of the northern region during the famine period of 1915. In 1937 she was imprisoned for her radical Trotskyist political outlook. Regionalism thus often served to point class inequalities in a radical leftist outlook of Brazilian society. A less covered ideological viewpoint is provided in Patrcia Galvo's 'proletarian novel' Industrial Park (1933), where she focuses on the injustice of the Brazilian system. Elements of nationalism are obviously subjugated for the purpose of class struggle, as in the following passage.
The way in which this passage points out any Brazilian national identity is clearly negative; it argues in favour of a 'simple', social Brazil instead of an internationally incorporated, capitalist nation. Elements of Brazilian grassroots national identity are ironically referred to as expressions of a repressed class:
Other poetry, although not as explicitly communist as Galvo (who, for this reason, spent four years in prison as a political prisoner), focussed on the rough and oppressive facets of the regime through from a national perspective. The liberal Mrio de Andrade in his poem 'The Wagon of Misery' ridicules the regime with deliberate spelling mistakes.
Brazilian literature and poetry of the modernist movement revealed thus revealed a highly politicised, polemic style, much embedded in the opposition of the dictatorship and united through this opposition rather than through a shared outlook of Brazilian nationalism proper. Throughout the thirties, Brazil remained still very much in search of a form of national cohesion.
In Mexico, the revolution proved to be the 'defining event', shaping the nation for the remainder of the century. For many, the success of the 1910s revolution was the culmination of revolutionary nationalism: the yoke of a century of oppression had now been thrown off. In an attempt to create a "new man" and "new woman", the new government turned to art, popular culture and education to create a new sense of nationhood for the Mexicans. The new Mexican nation now came to incorporate and celebrate a new group of inhabitants that had been previously been seen as passive and inferior: the Mexican Indian. The art of the 1920s and 1930s is thus marked by a fresh interest in Aztec art and architecture, and a celebration of the 'Indian race' can be found in nationalistic essays.
By the thirties, a new political machine, the National Revolutionary Party, had been put in place and the work of myth-making of Mexican heroes of the revolution started. This period has been marked the post-revolutionary period, as legitimising the state, as well as instilling a paradoxical blend of conservative revolutionary sentiments in Mexicans. This new ideological stream, indigenismo, was reflected in the mural paintings of Mexico's most prominent modern artists, in the work of intellectuals and in the number of epic novels about the revolution that were published in the twenties and thirties. It has, however, been held that for the government the aim was not 'to 'indigenize' Mexico, but to 'Mexicanize' the Indian'.
Indiginismo involved the reinterpretation of both the Indian and the nation. It involved, on the one hand, the creation of the myth of the radically social and progressive new Mexican nation, and on the other hand, a glorification of the Mexican Indian and their past. By the 1930s, however, the emphasis was shifted from race to culture. An interesting example can be found in the issue of bank notes. The depiction of a 'native woman, wearing traditional costume, standing before the Aztec calendar stone' was never circulated, and instead the images of Zaragoza and Madero were preferred. Now, notions of 'literacy, nationalism, notions of citizenship, sobriety, hygiene, and hard work' became part of the ideological mores; the Indians were believed to possess those qualities to an exceptional extent. They were, in fact, 'rational political actors with modern sensibilities'. To fit this singular representation, a new kind of Indian peasant emerged in literature:
Another aspect of this indigenismo were the rural ballads, corridos. They are transformed to be used on mass scale, into three-minute songs to be played on the radio Agustn Lara became the icon of this typically Mexican musical exponent. Often in appraisal of revolutionary heroes, corridos with their simple rhyme were easy to remember and thus accessible to considerable percentage of illiterate Mexicans. The following is an example of a corrido describing the death of Francisco Villa.
Yet another way in which the revolutionaries were eternalised and epitomised as heroes of the Mexican nation was through the paintings of Diego Rivera, Jose Orozco and David Alfaro Siqueiros. These modern artists - 'Los Tres Grandes'- had started in the twenties to experiment with mural painting, a style which they thereafter used effectively for the depiction of Mexico's indigenous history, scenes of the revolution and of the modern, industrialised, progressive state. Supported and often commissioned by the government, these painters fulfilled 'the visual component of [the] need to create that Mexican citizen necessary for the survival of the post-Revolutionary state'.
In terms of literature, the 1930s saw a continuation of the style employed in the twenties. Epic works with 'the man on horseback', the archetypical revolutionary also depicted in the mural paintings of the post-revolutionaries. Where Guzmn had in 1926 recounted his memories in the revolutionary army of Villa with The Eagle and the Serpent, Gregorio Lpez y Fuentes in 1932 created an epic hero out of Zapata. His novel The Land provided the sense of heroic Mexican leadership that legitimised the Mexican revolution.
There were, of course, also many writers opposed to this mythical image. In fact, the Mexican revolution brought no generation of poets of any significance; most of them were to be sought with the defeated reactionaries. Gmez Marn, who lived in London at the time wrote in a letter: 'From here, Mexico is something dark and bloody'. Moreover, the corrido, typical Mexican icon, could naturally also be used for other purposes than the glorification of the revolution. The following extract comes from a corrido praising the bravery of a christian Cristero rebellion.
Arguably, illiteracy rates stood in the way of effective nation-building through literature. Some have thus asserted that 'it [was] film, not writing, which create[d] [...] the 'imagined community' of the nation'. Indeed, when the first film with sound was made in 1931, it was sponsored by state funds. Such films, which like in the case of Argentina and Brazil, were capable of reaching as mass audience, dealt with popular themes such as destitute prostitutes (which, of course, fuelled the macho discourse of the frail woman in need of protection) and went accompanied by popular tunes, most notably those of Agustn Lara's soundtracks. The state was quite involved in the ideological message such films conveyed. Thus when the Soviet filmmaker Eisenstein, visiting Mexico, planned to make a film on the history of Mexico, the government withdrew their subsidies for fear that such a film might cause an outrage amongst the oligarchic hacienda owners.
In the aftermath of the revolutionary decade (1910-1920) in Mexico, the new authorities then energetically set about constructing the archetype of a new "ideal Mexican". This was based upon a renewed enthusiasm about the Indian, who was henceforth to be considered as a part of the new Mexican state. Indigenismo and, from the late 1920s into the thirties, revolutionary myth making played a big role in such representations. Nationalism was hence instilled through popular means: mural painting, the corrido ballad, film, and to some extent, epic literature. By actively interfering and negotiating these art forms, the state sought to channel the multitude of opinions into a glorification of the new Mexicanidad.
Nationhood is a fluid concept. It can be manipulated to incorporate whatever ideological ideas, and exclude or obscure what one does not find appropriate to it. Argentina and Brazil in the 1930s saw the beginning of a great transformation of nationhood, while Mexico had already begun that project directly after the Mexican revolution. Although often the state attempted to control cultural representations of its nationalism, intellectuals and poorer minorities did not let this happen easily. Borges refused to accept a simple, patriotic nationalism, thereby brilliantly revealing the paradoxes underlying such a concept; in Vargas' Brazil, the government was in a constant state of war with its poets and authors on the left, while former slaves of the favelas proved to be able to provide Brazil's most uniting and lasting national identity. Perhaps the Mexican state can be said to have succeeded best at imposing an official picture of nationalism. Their corridos and murals invoked a revolutionary-ideological Mexicanidad, party-style; and it would only be by the 1990s that Mexican natives started to wage war on that identity. Nevertheless, the successes in Mexico also knew their limits. The Catholic religion proved impossible to curb, while student protests in the 1970s already revealed the violent antagonism underlying the picture of Mexico that the government offered its people.
Representations of national identity, then, are inherently linked with political ideology and power. Brazilian authors with tendencies toward communism provide the example; they employ a highly politicised image of the 'true Brazilian' proletariat. In Argentina, such representations resulted in two opposing views, the gauchoesque patriot, modelled after Martin Fierro stood in contrast to the liberal modernist 'rational' Argentine inspired by Sarmiento's Facundo. When tango, the voice of the minorities, and Borges came into the equation, a mono-cultured Argentine ideal became more complicated and troublesome. Similar in each of the three countries discussed, however, are the influences of 'lower' cultural forms. Tango, initially despised by all respectable layers of society, became the epitome of Argentinidad and proud export product after its success in the Parisian salons, while the samba of the Brazilian blacks became a national virtue. In Mexico, the corrido and new popular film both served the ideal of praising the spiritual idealism that belonged inherently to the Mexican man and woman, as opposed to the violent pragmatism of Northern American men, and the dehumanised star beauty of the Hollywood actress.
Nationalism in all countries discussed, became increasingly represented in popular ways, reaching out to a mass audience. The constructors of such nationalistic forms sought to reach out to an unprecedented number of people, instilling upon them these new forms of nationalism. In Brazil, chanchadas united the country despite its immense differences in dialect, while in Mexico the party did their best to involve nationalism in every possible cultural and educational aspect. In Argentina it culminated in the decade of Peron's popular dictatorship. It can thus be said, that across these nations, the 1930s transformed nationalism into a popular and far-reaching construct.