C. B. MacPherson's The book set up a model of a fully competitive market society and examined, with its aid, the political theory of Hobbes, the Levellers, Harrington and Locke. MacPherson's thesis has resulted in a lively debate between himself, supported by Christopher Hill, on the one hand, and J. C. Davis, Peter Laslett, A. L. Morton and Keith Thomas, on the other, although many other historians have made valuable contributions. In 1973 MacPherson replied to his critics in
The main criticisms of MacPherson's thesis that this essay will highlight, and consequently argue as being fundamental to understanding the position the Levellers took towards the issue of the franchise, are twofold. First, that it is not possible to make a single theory applicable to the whole of the movement; it was full of internal differences of opinion, and was therefore not the homogenous party required for MacPherson's thesis. Second, that the Levellers were prepared to compromise their position on the franchise according to political events and to secure the acceptance of other equally important parts of their programme, and thus their standpoint changed. This essay will focus on evidence from the authoritative documents on the franchise, the An attempt will be made, therefore, not only to dispute much of MacPherson's argument, but to propose a different hypothesis of how the Levellers interpreted franchise reform, based around the notions of compromise and heterogeneity.
The starting point must be the Putney Debates, for it is from here that MacPherson commences and from which he makes all his later inferences that form the crux of his argument. The Levellers set out their franchise proposals to be debated at Putney in Article I from
To some this has indicated that the Levellers stood for manhood suffrage, arguing that if any exclusions were implicit, then it would be phrased something like, 'according to the number of electors' and not 'inhabitants'.
Once the
MacPherson highlights Petty's response:
MacPherson argues that in this first Leveller statement on the franchise in the debate, 'one category of inhabitants was excluded'.
It is important to notice that Rich clearly understands Ireton's argument 'to be directed against someone who would include servants in the franchise' and that there is 'no dissenting voice to this imputation'.
However, when the debate reaches the discussion of the details of the franchise extensions MacPherson uses another statement by Petty to interpret his initial declaration:
He argues that it becomes clear that the Levellers had always been assuming the exclusion of servants and alms-takers and this was understood by their opponents; Cromwell starts from this agreed point. Petty does not refute the exclusions, which MacPherson asserts would be expected if the Levellers advocated manhood suffrage, but actually states the reason.
However, MacPherson's interpretation of the debate does not seem to concur with the progress of discussion. Colonel Rolfe realised the debate had entered a position of stalemate, recommending that:
Ireton consequently introduced the argument about the dependence on the will of other men:
Cromwell continues this line of argument, taking up Rolfe's suggestions and does not start from an agreed point, as MacPherson argues, but responds to a period in the debate. Hence 'Petty's remarks after this could be interpreted as an examination of the proposal rather than an endorsement of it'. 'It is much more likely, therefore, that his [Petty's] initial remark about inhabitants who had lost their birthright was a reference to the exclusion of the supporters of Charles I.'
The position of the Levellers becomes far clearer if the section that MacPherson neglects is considered. After interpreting the opening exchanges of the discussion, he leaps to Cromwell's interjection ignoring nearly 30 pages of debate. Ireton advocated the freeholder franchise, those with a 'permanent fixed interest', whilst the Levellers proposed enfranchising 'any man that is born in England'. John Boy's record of Cromwell's subsequent speech to Parliament 'reveals he [Cromwell] sincerely believed his own and Ireton's rhetoric about the thrust behind the
Yet when falsely accused on other issues the Levellers were quick to repudiate such allegations.
Nevertheless, MacPherson argues that in light of Petty's statements it is possible to infer that servants and alms-takers had 'lost their birthright', and were therefore ineligible to vote under Leveller proposals. He argues that they 'may quite as well have been understood to exclude servants as they undoubtedly were understood to exclude women'.
The main problem for MacPherson's argument is his use of Petty. Not only is there great doubt as to the way in which Petty's later statement on the exclusions are interpreted, but there is a significant question concerning him as a Leveller spokesman. MacPherson assumes that Petty's views were synonymous with those of the Levellers, but apart from this appearance, the fact that he sat on some of the Leveller committees, and that he later became a member of Harrington's Rota Club, whose aristocratic republican tone was very different from that of the Leveller's, little is known about him. Petty explained that he came to Putney 'to give my own reason why I do assent to it [the On the second day when he made the statements upon which MacPherson places so much emphasis, it was once again Wildman and Rainsborough who did much of the negotiating.
If this is to be accepted then it is far more likely that the Levellers were more democratic than MacPherson would admit. Yet Rainsborough was also somewhat of a peculiar figure in terms of the Levellers. A trend is therefore becoming apparent in analysing the individuals of the movement and subsequently trying to find any consistent principles, which will be explored.
In considering Petty's position at Putney it is interesting and important to note a change, for which MacPherson does not account. Petty began as a supporter of the Once it was clear that manhood suffrage would not be accepted by the Cromwell and Ireton, Petty was prepared to compromise towards the end of the debate by excluding certain groups. On the 4 Although they had to compromise on their original proposal for manhood suffrage, they had secured an agreement on a much wider franchise than ever before. MacPherson, therefore, was correct in using Petty as representative of the Levellers, although for a different reason. His shift 'was the first sign of the movement the Levellers subsequently made on the issue for tactical reasons' that will be fundamental to the argument of this essay.
Even if MacPherson is incorrect in asserting that the Levellers always implied the exclusion of those who had lost their birthright, they eventually compromised and agreed to a non-servant franchise. It is therefore necessary to understand who they understood to be servants and alms-takers. One of the greatest controversies surrounding MacPherson's thesis has been regarding his interpretation of the term servant. In
However, Laslett, who has been one of MacPherson's greatest critics, argues that 'the word servant in seventeenth-century England simply did not cover all persons receiving wages'. Laslett regards servants usually as residents within their masters' household, not always a domestic servant, but those who by patriarchalism were 'included in the persons of their masters'.
Laslett, supported by Morton, also argues that being a servant was merely a stage in life. The typical servant was young and unmarried, living in the household of his master. Once married the servant set up a household of his own, and would then be classed as a labourer, craftsman, cottager or husbandman. From King MacPherson simply highlights that there were around 100,000 'servants in husbandry' who were described and living out. The Quarter Session Wage Assessments illustrate that 3 of the 13 assessments describe servants, not labourers, as men working in husbandry at daily or weekly rates, thus there is evidence from both sources that some servants retained such a title even when they moved out and became labourers and masters in their own right.
However, the statistical evidence used by MacPherson is 'open to considerable criticism'. The ten percent rate of growth he assumed seems fair, but this 20 year period was one of rapid change; England was in a transitional period towards proto-industrialism and agricultural capitalism. Thus there was a massive expansion in the number of wage-earners in such a short space of time, and consequently MacPherson 'exaggerates the proportion of the population who in 1648 were wholly or partly dependent upon wages'. For example, cottagers, with common rights and some land, who maintained a living by sporadic wage-earnings, would not have been regarded as servants. Out of the 40 wage assessments MacPherson discovered, only 13 were complete enough to be able to use for statistical purposes. Therefore over two thirds of the assessments were not used by MacPherson, and this illustrates the fragile nature of his statistical analyses and surely casts doubt over the assertions he makes.
MacPherson's case does not however rest solely on statistical evidence, as he looks to the literature of franchise proponents. James Harrington defined servants as those who have not the 'wherewithal to live of themselves', those without enough property to live independently of employment. This was 'as great in the case of employees living out as in the case of employees living in'; in fact, as those living out were on less than an annual contract, if anything, were more dependent for employment. 'Since the dependence on others for a livelihood was the criterion of servanthood, the presumption must be that the wage-earners living out were equally regarded as servants' and therefore excluded under the Leveller franchise reforms. Thus the inclusion of the in-servant in his master was not a result of Laslett's patriarchal model, MacPherson argues, but due to a market relation and 'in this fundamental respect he was in the same position as the out-servant and common labourer.'
It is difficult to argue against MacPherson's assertion that the dependence of in-servants and out-servants on their masters was, in part, of a market nature. However, the out-servant had, in general, a greater level of independence from the employer, due to short term contracts. Although he clearly depended on the will of other men, the out-servant had a certain level of freedom to choose, or at least leave, his master. The in-servant was bound to his master for the whole year during which he was in a patriarchal relationship. This is of importance when related to the process of voting, as part of the reason for excluding servants was to avoid intimidation at the hustings. 'It was not likely that the general body of wage-earners would be intimidated, but the servants of single employers would certainly have feared to vote by publicly lifting their hands against the wishes of the lord and master." Under the existing economic situation servants and beggars were therefore not free to follow their conscience, and for this reason could be justifiably excluded.
In addition, there is more evidence to suggest that there was a difference between servants and the general body of wage-earners. The language of the The second A servant's contract could only be broken with the consent of the Justice of Peace, whereas the day-labourer was employed casually, frequently changed employers, often worked on a piece-work basis and could be dismissed at will. In the wage assessments by the Justices of Peace, wages of servants were given by the year and labourers by the day or week.
MacPherson does accept that there were certain administrative and statistical classifications the term servant was sometimes only used for a sub-class of wage-earners. For example, parish lists by household detailed the composition and the occupation of the head of the household. The term servant was used to indicate an in-servant, whereas wage-earners living out and being heads of their own households were listed by occupation, such as labourer or thatcher. MacPherson argues that 'in each class of cases there is a simple reason, of logic or convenience, for the narrow usage' and thus can be treated as 'subordinate or exceptional'. Yet, MacPherson does not consider that the Levellers and their opponents at Putney might both have understood that servants in this narrow sense, domestic in-servants and not the whole body of wage-earners, were being discussed.
Disregarding this MacPherson concludes that as a 'general rule' the term servant meant all wage-earners. This, he asserts, is strengthened by the historical continuity of the terms master and servant. Where social and legal relations were being described, he argues, the most natural term for a wage-earner was servant, as it described on part of the master-servant relation, which had been in usage far before relations of a contractual nature were common. But why, therefore, if labourer was not appropriate due to its other possible meanings, was servant, for it too, as MacPherson concedes, had other implications. In any case why is 'some word needed' for all wage-earners? This period was characterised by the rapid increase of wage-earners and it is very likely for there to have been a 'time lag between development of new social relationships and the invention of a vocabulary adequate to describe them'.
The term servant therefore had a great number of connotations in the seventeenth-century, but the Levellers when they excluded servants were more likely to have been describing the traditional meaning of the term, the domestic in-servant, than the emerging wage-earning class as a whole. The Leveller programme contained proposals that increased 'the opportunities for apprentices and servants to become masters'. If the they believed that servants were only under the temporary control of their lord, and could under Leveller reforms break free of these shackles, then it is 'easier to explain why their spokesmen apparently attached so little importance to the disenfranchisement of servants and took so little pains to justify what would otherwise have been in glaring contradiction to their very sweeping and emphatic assertions of the rights of every man to have a voice in choosing the government he lived under'.
There is also a certain amount of ambiguity concerning the term alms-taker. The Levellers used both terms alms-taker and beggar, which can have significantly different meanings. A beggar is different from a cottager forced to seek emergency parish relief and different again from those habitually dependent. In any case Petty continued to describe 'those that receive alms from door-to-door', which is surely a reference to beggars and not those in receipt of parish relief. Such people had been temporarily impoverished by the Civil Wars, and 'we know that they regarded alms-takers as capable of taking their own decisions'. The Levellers therefore certainly wanted to exclude beggars from the franchise and, until the Officer's However, MacPherson argues that the Levellers sought not only to exclude beggars, but also alms-takers that were 'notoriously marked out as dependent'. On 23 From MacPherson's estimates for 1648 there were 343,000 alms-takers, but only 10,000 beggars.
It has therefore been ascertained that the proportion of adult males that the Levellers excluded was far less than MacPherson proposes, with a narrower interpretation of the terms servant and alms-taker. But was there an underlying principle that resulted in such exclusions, as MacPherson has illustrated. He argues that for the Levellers, 'property in his own labour made a man free'. Wage labourers and alms-takers had lost their birthright as a result of their economic dependence on others; they had lost the property in their own persons and were therefore not entitled to vote. This labour had not been completely 'abandoned' but the right to such labour had been transferred to his master. 'Accordingly, in respect of the right to a voice in elections, the servant is included in the master." For alms-takers the case is not as clear. MacPherson argues that the impotent poor were by definition 'incapable of useful labour' as 'they had no labour either to alienate or gain', and were therefore dependent upon the will of the community, their master. The partially dependent poor who could work, but relied upon the community for relief had a similar relation. Finally, the vagrant beggars can be 'assumed to have been left out of the Levellers calculations entirely', because they had put themselves outside of society by refusing to 'work usefully'. First, it must be remembered that, as identified, the Levellers were considering the exclusion of beggars and not those temporarily reliant on alms. Moreover although MacPherson regards beggars as outside of the community, they 'would seem to have retained the politically significant aspect of their personality, their labour, by refusing to work for others'.
MacPherson's theory also does not take into account the enfranchisement of the soldiers, who as a reward for successfully defending Parliamentarian freedom were granted the vote. Therefore although MacPherson's theory of 'self-propriety' neatly explains the exclusion of servants and alms-takers, it does not account for the exclusion of beggars, or the inclusion of the soldiers. The Levellers did believe that the birthright could be forfeited. Crimes against the state were frequently highlighted by Levellers in such terms, but MacPherson fails to include the exclusion of Royalists in his theory. Delinquents, as they were often described, were excluded in Lilburne, along with Petty, Sexby and Walwyn, was a former apprentice, yet declared:
Thus 'criminal delinquency and apprenticeship apart, there is little indication in the Leveller writings of other circumstances under which the birthright could be forfeited." It is possible that MacPherson, while creating an impressively original theory, went too far in trying to find a consistency not present in Leveller reforms, which will be discussed at length. He was only able to link such a hypothesis tenuously to Petty's statements at Putney. The reason Petty gives for excluding servants and beggars is as a result of their dependence on the 'will of other men' and should therefore be 'afraid to displease [them]'.
MacPherson also uses Petty's remarks at Putney to make inferences about the nature of Leveller franchise reform proposals in the pre-Putney pamphlets. He argues that none of the pre-Putney documents were specific concerning Leveller proposals for the franchise, and that only by understanding the issues at Putney, where the extent of the proposed franchise enlargement was 'first made explicit', can interpretations be made about earlier statements. It was only at Putney that the franchise became the pre-eminent issue, because the Levellers had reached a strong enough political position to be able to think as far ahead as to the extent of the franchise reforms. As noted MacPherson argues that at Putney, in light of Petty's statements, when the Levellers talked of, for example, 'freeborn men', they were not considering all men, but those that had not lost their birthright. Thus, MacPherson argues, this interpretation can be used to construct a better understanding of
In light of the assumptions made at Putney servants and alms-takers therefore 'deprived themselves' and were not eligible for the vote under Leveller reform proposals.
However, much of MacPherson's thesis concerning the use of Petty's statements at Putney, and the inferences made thereof regarding the implicit exclusions of such groups, has been disputed. Thus the pamphlets and other documents published before the Putney debates can therefore be taken at face value, and do not need to be re-interpreted. To cite just one example, He goes on to assert that it is 'improbable that a document of this sort, having specified delinquency as a reason for disenfranchisement, would have included these other grounds in so unspecific and ambiguous a way'. The Levellers held a diverse range of opinions and at this point in the movement's existence there was no necessity to formulate such specific demands as they were simply a pressure group petitioning Parliament. Once they reached the zenith of their political influence around the Putney debates they had to begin debating what they actually wanted in terms of an enlarged franchise, and it is here that the impracticality of attempting to find consistency in Leveller proposals can be most easily identified.
One of the greatest problems with MacPherson's thesis is the notion that the Levellers 'presented a coherent and unified programme'. MacPherson's Levellers are unified in proposing a non-servant franchise, whereas pre-MacPherson Levellers were all seen to advocate manhood suffrage. Most historians have thus looked for consistency, in a highly inconsistent movement. MacPherson therefore attempts to establish an unnecessary uniformity by interpreting the statements of the other Levellers in accordance with Petty's apparent exclusions. It was heterogeneous, with members being drawn together with shared grievances, but with a diverse range of solutions. This is supported by Henry Denne in the
Thus although MacPherson suggests Rainsborough's comments about the 'poorest he' meant the same as Petty's 'all inhabitants', they could easily have meant exactly what they appeared to, providing it is understood that the Levellers held different views on the extent of franchise reforms.
The evidence from The Officers' The implication was that such people had been discarded from society by government mismanagement or hard times as a result of the Civil Wars, and if order was to be restored then they would be able to support themselves. Thus there are 'indications that Many Levellers, however, objected to such a broad definition of 'the people'. '
The attitudes of William Walwyn are the best example of individual diversity within the movement. He has been described as 'one of the most thorough-going revolutionaries in an age of revolution', by questioning commonly accepted ideas challenging the whole social structure. When he, Lilburne, Overton and Prince were arrested on 28
There were several possibilities for such a retreat, yet most interestingly for the purposes of this essay, there was a 'hint of a tactical difference' between Lilburne and Walwyn concerning the Officer's In
It is also possible to see other differences between Walwyn and the majority of the Leveller leadership. His opponents constantly tried to show that he was in favour of equality of condition and the abolition of private property and to therefore infer such beliefs on the movement. On the latter point Walwyn responded unequivocally, referring to Article XXX of the final
Thus the But Walwyn, who wrote the preface 'was a convinced egalitarian, favouring equality in education and advocating a near approach to equality of income'.  He was, for example, accused being of communist:
'The arguments here are so apt, and the tone of the actual speech so well caught that it is very hard to think this passage is pure invention', for Walwyn never denied having made such comments.
The Levellers were therefore a group of radicals drawn together in the 1640s by shared grievances. At the zenith of their political influence, between 1647 and 1648, the Levellers had to begin formulating concrete proposals for political, social and economic reform. It is in this period that the extent of the diversity within the movement became pronounced. The Levellers were heterogeneous and therefore, to look for a single theory on the franchise that all Levellers supported is to misunderstand the movement. What can be done instead is to understand what the Levellers proposed at a given time concerning the franchise and why this was the case. For the Levellers were astute politicians, more than political theorists, and it is therefore necessary to interpret the development of their franchise reform proposals in terms of political reality and not abstract theory, as MacPherson has done.
MacPherson dismisses the notion of a 'temporary change in the Leveller position', Morton argues that the Leveller pamphlets were not merely abstract statements of political theory, but 'they were party programmes, weapons in an active political campaign and modified from time to time in accordance with the changing political situation and the political needs of the struggle'. As the Levellers became increasingly politically influential and made a serious bid for power, their programme underwent frequent tactical changes reflecting political developments, which will be assessed chronologically. It is also necessary to remember that Leveller franchise proposals were 'not meant to be taken in isolation but as part of a programme of democratic reform which would transform England'.
The first sign of Leveller compromise was at the Putney debates. This has already been discussed in depth and therefore it should suffice to merely highlight the main developments. The compromise was first suggested by the Army Officers, and Petty was the only Leveller to accept the need for concession. Petty realised that although the Levellers were in a politically strong position, for them to further their cause they required the support of the Army. Compromise was therefore necessary, for the Grandees would never have accepted manhood suffrage. This tactical compromise 'had the desired effect of winning moderate opinion to their side'; only three officers dissented in the resulting vote.
The Putney debates were followed by a resolution proposed by Rainsborough for a general rendezvous of the Army, where the Yet Cromwell and Ireton were 'soon able to launch an effective counter-strike', for the Levellers were becoming too powerful within the Army and they felt the need to reassert their control. At the first rendezvous at Corkbush Field in Ware the Grandees were to present their However, two further regiments joined the rendezvous uninvited, those of Colonel Robert Lilburne and Colonel Thomas Harrison, the latter wearing copies of the The Army leadership responded by ordering the radical officers off the field, some were arrested and one was shot in an attempt to regain control of the situation. In the aftermath of Ware and the recovery of full control by the Grandees, the General Council once more became exclusively consistent of officers; 'the Levellers had therefore lost their platform inside the Army'.
Accordingly the It was a compromise document and therefore extreme proposals, notably demands for manhood suffrage, were omitted in an attempt to regain moderate and especially Army support. Such sentiments were echoed by Wildman regarding the Wildman stated that the authors 'inserted no such particular grievances as might disengage any considerable party, and so continue our distractions." Thus the Leveller leadership recognised the need to be politically astute and whilst proposing radical reform, in order to for such proposals to have the best chance of being implemented they required widespread support, at least with the politically powerful. The Levellers were therefore willing to compromise and continue with the exclusion of servants and alms-takers, if this provision was to enable the movement to further its other causes.
This is best illustrated by the second What is of more significance is that the Levellers, and the Grandees, were prepared to make yet more concessions in order to maintain their political influence, and for the acceptance of the Leveller programme as a whole: 'it shows the Levellers at their most practical and realistic'.
Despite the best efforts of the Levellers to maintain their political influence, by 1649 the Army leaders and their parliamentary allies were in firm control of events. The King had been executed and the country was in a state of peace; taxes were being collected, and law and order was imposed. The 'new rulers seemed to be setting up as tight-knit and oligarchical regime as any which had been seen in England before'. As a result of the publication of the second part of It was from the Tower that they produced the final The Levellers still did not demand manhood suffrage, as they had to compromise in order to regain their broad base of support. 'The lineaments of their vision of England stood out not as much as democratic as libertarian and decentralist.'
Throughout the short life of the movement it is clear that the Levellers were prepared to make tactical concessions for political gains. Yet MacPherson refutes this; why does he assume that the Levellers could not be democrats if Petty was not and why does he believe that they could never be democrats it they were not at Putney? MacPherson asserts that 'the Levellers were zealots for principle and had they ever embraced the full principle of universal suffrage they could scarcely have withdrawn it from the agricultural labourers on such wholly expedient grounds'. The Levellers thought that the issue of tithes was a matter of principle, and in 1645 Overton devoted a whole pamphlet to the subject. The It was again deliberately left out of the It is not necessary to assess why the Levellers compromised on the issue of tithes, but should indicate that the concessions on the franchise were not isolated. The Levellers were 'capable of compromise, when they thought they were being taken seriously', and had a real opportunity to affect political reality. Similar actions can be traced on the issues of local government, position of the King, of the House of Lords and parliamentary reform in general. Their real zeal did not lie in one particular issue, but in the demand for a more equal and just society, and they were prepared to make concessions for the acceptance of their radical programme as a whole. 'They were interested in political and constitutional arrangements as a means and not an end in themselves'.
The aim of this essay has been not only to highlight many of the problems of MacPherson's thesis, but also to propose an alternative interpretation of Leveller franchise reform proposals. MacPherson's analysis centres round his understanding of the proceedings at the Putney debates. He uses remarks made by Petty on the exclusion of servants and alms-takers to argue that the Levellers assumed such exclusions throughout the debates and infers such an interpretation on pamphlets published before Putney, which include no such qualifications. The main criticism of this understanding has been levelled at his use of Petty as representative for the rest of the movement. Moreover greater controversy has surrounded his assertion that the term servant meant all wage-earners. There is much evidence that has been highlighted to question such an understanding, and it seems that 'this was simply not the intention of the Levellers'. There is also a certain amount of uncertainty regarding the exclusion of alms-takers, for it appears that the Levellers only wanted to exclude beggars and those habitually dependent on alms relief. MacPherson has therefore vastly over exaggerated the number of men that the Levellers would have excluded from the franchise, under their non-servant franchise proposals. MacPherson took his thesis further by attempting to find an underlying theory that guided their franchise demands. His proposal for a Leveller theory of the 'self-propriety' of labour seems to have some credibility when analysed in the case of servants, but it does not explain why beggars and soldiers would have been enfranchised and not supporters of the King.
Not only does this highlight the main problem with MacPherson's thesis, but illustrates one of two fundamental factors that this essay has stressed as vital in understanding the Levellers and the franchise. The Levellers were political realists, willing to compromise on specific issues if it meant that there was more chance of the acceptance of their programme as a whole. Throughout their short political life the Levellers had changed their demands accordingly with political developments; the final goal was more important than single issues. The Levellers 'adopted a democratic stance when they believed it was indispensable to their purposes, and equally they abandoned it when it was a hindrance to their achievement'. They came together with shared grievances, but often they did not share the same solutions. The Levellers were thus 'a more heterogeneous party advocating a programme that has not been fully worked out in all its details, but prepared to make a series of compromises to achieve its ends." Thus any attempt to discover a single principle that guided the Levellers on the issue of the franchise would seem fruitless, for there were a myriad of opinions. Yet certain generalisations can be made. The Levellers were not necessarily all democrats, although it was manhood suffrage that was being discussed at Putney, but they strove to create an egalitarian order. There would be greater opportunity to own property in a Leveller society, and thus people would not be reliant on others for wage-labour or alms. The voting body would be widely extended, significantly more than stated by MacPherson under the non-servant franchise for there would be fewer servants and beggars, and thus there would be greater political participation, heightened by a decentralised state. Thus it is questionable whether so much emphasis should be placed simply on their proposals for franchise reform. They proposed an incredibly radical and 'modern' set of ideals that were far more important than one issue, proposing a written constitution that England has not adopted to this day.