The main objects of this report are:
To understand how the Jominy End Quench Test is used to determine a steels hardenability
To determine the hardenability of EN9 & EN24 steels, and their typical uses in engineering.
To relate how hardenability can be used to define how micro-structural properties of steel transform at a given depth when cooled under known conditions.
Emphasise the use of hardenability to ensure that the right material choice is made for a specific engineering application
Demonstrate how by adding alloying elements to steel the hardenability is increased
Carbon steels can be strengthened by quenching and tempering. To obtain the optimum properties the steel must be quenched past the nose of the C-curve, the Critical Cooling Rate (CCR) for the steel. Figure 1 shows a typical C-curve for steel. If the cooling rate of a steel component is below the CCR then the steel will transform to 100% martensite.
If the component is large then ensuring the centre of the component cools at a rate below the CCR is difficult due to the surfaced layers insulating the bulk of the material from the quenching medium. To over come these problems alloying elements are added to the steel, common alloying elements are: Manganese (Mn), Nickel (Ni), Chromium (Cr), Molybdenum (Mo), Tungsten (W), Vanadium (V), Cobalt (Co), Silicon (Si), Boron (B), Copper (Cu), Aluminium (Al), Titanium (Ti) and Niobium (Nb).
By adding the alloying elements the transformation to the equilibrium phase is slowed down, effectively shifting the Time Temperature Transformation curves (TTT-Curves) to the right. This lowers the CCR, allowing more time for the steel to be cooled, which in turn prevents the risk of cracking or distortion associated with rapid quenching. The hardenability is therefore said to be increased.
Hardenability can be defined as the measure of depth to which hardness can be attained in a metal part using one of the standard thermal processing techniques designed to increase hardness.
If a material is said to have a good hardenability, then it is able to transmit hardness through its structure well.
The Jominy end-quench test is the standard method used to measure the hardenability of steels. The test consists of taking a steel bar 104mm (4 inches) with a diameter of 25.4mm (1 inch), heating, and holding it in the austenite region until all the alloying elements are in solution. The bar is then quenched in water by spraying a jet of water onto the end of the bar. The surface cools very rapidly, but the section of bar behind the quenched surface cools progressively more slowly. Once the bar has cooled, it is hardness tested along its entire length.
The Jominy End Quench test procedure for this report can be seen in Appendix A.
The Vickers hardness test is used to measure the hardness of the samples along their lengths. The Vickers test uses a square pyramidal diamond indentor. The recorded hardness depends on the indentation load and the width of the square indentation made by the diamond. The indentation load used in this report was 30Kg, although typical loads vary between 10 and 30 kg. The width and height dimensions for the pyramid indentation are measured from the sample and cross referenced to a look up table used to convert the dimensions into Vickers hardness values.
Table 1 shows Vickers hardness values at increasing distances from the quenched end of the two samples quenched hardened. It also shows the hardness results of the same materials in their as received from manufacture state. Because these samples we not heat treated it was not necessary to take as many test results, as the hardness should be uniform throughout the section. Inconsistent values found during testing can be attributed to imperfections (scratches, indentations, etc...) on the samples surface, causing errors in the Vickers hardness tests.
According to BS970-3: 1991
070M55 is specified as a Carbon Manganese Steel
817M40 is specified as a Alloy Steel
As already discussed in this report the addition of alloy elements increased the hardenability of steel. Below is a brief summary of some of the alloying elements and the effects they have on hardenability.
The results show that the two steel samples acquired much higher Vickers hardness values after the heat treatment.
Graph 1 shows the test results for the 070M55 steel, this has a high hardness value towards the water quenched end, but this hardness value falls quickly as the distance from the quenched area increases. Less than 10mm in from the quenched end of the sample the hardness value has fallen to half that of the initial hardness. This indicates that the hardenability of the steel is low, and that a high critical cooling rate must be achieved to ensure full hardening of a component made from this material. The hardness value continues to decrease albeit at a much slower rate, to a point where the hardness is actually lower than that found by testing the "As received" sample.
Graph 2 shows the test results for the 817M40 steel, this material exhibits much better hardenability since the depth of the increased hardness is much deeper (~30mm from the quench sample end). Although the actual hardness values tend to fluctuate (due to surface\grain imperfections) the average hardness over the fist 30mm from the quench end can be seen to be approximately 620HV. Beyond 30mm the hardness falls rapidly until it's only slightly higher value that the "As received" sample. The better hardenability characteristics are due to the 817M40 containing extra alloying elements which help to slow down the transformation to the equilibrium state.
Graph 3 shows the results of the two quench hardened steels, note that the initial hardness values at the quenched end are close, showing that for thin section material (<5mm) the 070M55 steel would make the most suitable choice due to its lower manufacturing costs, and the 817M40 is best suited to thicker section materials where full hardening is to be achieved throughout the larger components.
Hardening of steels is done for many reasons, such as tooling applications when working with other materials (Drill, or saw blade), or for applications where high strength is required automobile springs or inspection gages.
The hardness of carbon steels can be improved greatly by quenching from high temperature when all the elements of the steel are in an austenitic phase. To ensure full quench hardening high cooling rates must be achieved so as not to pass the nose of the C-curve on the TTT diagram. This is possible when using thin steel sheet or small diameter rods (<25mm) and quenching in water. However on thicker section only the surface may harden, or on very large sections even the surface may not harden. High cooling rates can cause internal stresses in the steel and lead to distortion and cracking.
This problem can be overcome with the addition of alloying elements, such as Manganese, chromium, Molybdenum, Carbon & Nickel. These alloying elements slow down the phase transformations allowing longer cooling times, enabling much thicker sections to be fully hardened. The disadvantage of adding these alloying elements is the extra cost of producing the alloy steel grades.
To gain maximum hardenability in moderate sized sections a carbon content of 0.6-0.8% is necessary. Above 1% carbon hardenability decreases as the carbon tends to promote the formation of ferrite.