The aim of this report is to provide a material specification for use in a gas transportation cylinder. The material selection process is to be done by utilising a materials selector package called CES.
The main objectives for the choice of material are:
The CES package will be used to short list materials for use as a pressure vessel by means of constraints which are set to filter out unsuitable materials. Finally arriving at a choice of suitable materials from which to choose from.
The constraints are fixed (minimum or maximum) values that must be met. In the case of the gas cylinder there are fixed constraints for the materials yield stress and ultimate tensile stress.
Other constraints may not be set values but preferred options or useful characteristics, such as material cost, surface finish etc.
All these characteristics are carefully chosen so that the short listed materials are the best choice.
Pressure vessels are storage vessels that have been designed to operate at pressures greater than normal (generally above 15 p.s.i.g 1). They can be defined as a container that has a cross section larger than the associated pipe or tubing.
Common applications for pressure vessels include general purpose, chemical, cosmetics, food and beverage, oil/ fuel, paper and pulp, pharmaceutical and plastic processing, and power generation.
Important parameters to consider when specifying pressure vessels include the capacity (volume of the pressure vessel), the maximum pressure (the pressure range that the vessel can withstand) and the temperature range (temperature of the material that the container can withstand).
1 - Pounds per sq. inch gauge.Pressure vessels with temperature controls have gauges to allow for reading of internal pressures and temperatures.
Pressure sources for pressure vessels are limited to the maximum allowable working pressure of the lowest rated system component. When sources cannot be limited, the use of a pressure-relief devices is required. Common relief devices include a spring-loaded relief valves and rupture or burster disc assemblies. Additional connections, such as audible alarms and computer regulation are often necessary in systems where pressure relief is necessary, especially if the chemical being contained is hazardous in nature.
The first objective when making material selection is to identify what the main function is for the component. In the case of the gas cylinder, the function is a Pressure Vessel which is subjected to internal loading.
Pressure vessels fall into two categories for the design, they are either yield before break or leak before break.
If a pressure vessel has been designed to yield before break, then the vessel under extreme conditions may become distorted (develop a bulge etc,) here the UTS needs to be significantly higher than the yield strength to ensure that the vessel remains intact even when distorted. If the pressure vessel is deigned to the leak before break failure criteria, then any cracks that appear in the vessel must not propagate. Instead the material must have a high fracture toughness, to ensure if a crack does appear it won't increase in size.
Since the main objectives for the selection process is cost and safety (strength) these can be considered important requirements, below is a list of specification requirements for a pressure vessel.
In each of the graph stages constraint boxes were used to select only the best materials in that selection graph. The position and size of the constraint box was determined by what material characteristics the graph was displaying and how many materials were required.
In the case of Error! Reference source not found. , the constraint box was placed in the upper right hand corner of the graph, this selected materials with high fracture toughness &amp; fatigue limit.
Each graph stage used this constraint technique to eliminate all the unsuitable materials. There is a function in the CES software that allows the user to apply all the constraints from each selection stage to the database, which then shows only the materials whose properties meet all the selection criteria. With this function selected, the constraint boxes on the graph stages can be manipulated to either increase or decrease the list of possible materials. If there were any fixed constraints such as a maximum cost, or minimum allowable strength, then the CES software allows the user to add additional limits to the graph stages, via means of a selection line which can be placed on the graph axis. Either side of the line can then be selected as the minimum or maximum limit. Another feature is the ability to plot a performance index line, where all the materials lying along the line have the same index.
Using this eliminating process, the list of materials was reduced down to 7 different materials (material groups were discarded, such as Cast Duplex Stainless Steel &amp; Wrought Ferritic Stainless Steel).
In researching pressure vessels and materials for use in pressure vessels, it was observed that all large pressure vessel are manufactured out of steel due to its low cost, good material properties, ease of manufacture (espically welding) and availability. Typically smaller model vessel are made from copper for its good corrosion resistance.
If hydrogen is to be contained then either Stainless Steel or Aluminium Alloy is used.
There are many different standards to consider when designing pressure vessels that govern which materials choice, size, dimensions, working pressures, fittings, pressure meters etc. All these standards must be understood and conformed to in order to produce an acceptable pressure vessel design. There are also strict rules on the testing and acceptance of pressure vessels that need to be followed.
If the pressure vessel was to contain hydrogen, then the material choice would be AISI 210 (annealed), due to its hydrogen embrittlement characteristics.
However if the pressure vessel wasn't to contain hydrogen then the AISI 1095 would be the material of choice. This is due to its lower cost than the AISI 201 and higher tensile strength, endurance limit &amp; hardness than the AISI 9255, although the fracture toughness and elastic limit is lower for the AISI 1095 but well within the specified limits.
The material chosen for use as a pressure vessel are Carbon Steel AISI 1095 (normalized), or if the pressure vessel contained hydrogen Austenitic Stainless Steel 201 (annealed).
The AISI 1095 is the cheaper material that posses the best material properties, and therefore the best choice. It meets the initial design specification, and has good corrosion resistance.
AISI 201 was chosen due to its lower strength and therefore better hydrogen embrittlement characteristics, although the price is slightly higher.
The main manufacturing technique used in pressure vessel construction is welding, usually done by appropriately qualified welders in order to meet the strict safety requirements. Pressure vessels may also be riveted or bolted construction, but these operate at a relatively low pressure.
Pressure vessels are but assuming a factor of safety of 4 based on the ultimate tensile stress of the material.