The aim of this report is to investigate the dynamic properties of a mild steel plate. Numerical and experimental methods for determining the dynamic behaviour will be investigated and conclusions drawn from the results obtained.
The application of modal analysis techniques in an automotive environment will be considered and implications of structural design on vehicle structures discussed.
The main objectives of the investigation are:
Perform practical experimental investigation of a freely supported steel plate using modal analysis software.
Perform a full modal analysis of the steel plate under varying support schemes using Finite Element (FE) package.
Investigate the effects of varying geometry of the steel plate using FE package.
Predict the steel plates dynamic characteristics through the use of ESDU charts
This report investigates three methods for performing a modal analysis of a flat plate:
The modes and natural frequencies of the plate with various edge conditions and additional features can be seen in this section.
Appendix 3 contains all the tabulated data displayed graphically, comparing the correlation between the three methods.
Appendix 4 contains images of the modal response along with natural frequencies of all the plates tested from the FE Analysis.
Appendix 5 contains the relevant ESDU charts used to determine the natural frequencies for the ESDU calculations. The results tables reference the necessary EDSU chart figures.
As shown in the results section, the flat plate model with differing edge conditions was investigated. Practical results were obtained for the FF-FF edge conditions, and FE & ESDU results were obtained for SS-FF & CC-CC edge conditions also. The FE Analysis was also able to investigate the effects of spot weld edge conditions.
FE Analysis was carried out on a swage plate, with varying feature dimensions. A curved plate was also modelled and the results compared to the flat plate model.
With advancing technology companies are always pushing to be the market leader, product time to market, performance and value for money are all key to the success of a product. It is therefore vital that the company use the most appropriate tools to perform engineering tasks.
This report has investigated 3 methods available to the engineer to investigate the modal response of flat plates. It has critically compared all there methods highlighting the pros and cons for each method.
As desktop computers become ever more powerful advanced analytical tools offer the engineer greater freedom to design complex components and much shorter development cycles. However advanced tools require training, and proficiency comes with experience and regular use of the tools.
ESDU design data and design tools is another valuable addition the engineers tool box, allowing quick and straight forward component or structural evaluation without the large outlay associated with advanced FEA software packages.
Possibly the most realistic of all the methods discussed in this report is actual test of the real thing, which yields real life results as opposed to predicted results.
Is it important to realise that results from any of the methods are only as accurate as the setup or configuration. Incorrect material properties, physical constraints may render the results meaningless.
Being able to validate predicted or practical results is still an important part of the development process and should not be over looked.
This report has shown how the design of flat steel plates such as those found in vehicle structures can be affected by geometrical layout and varying edge conditions. From the results gained through the testing of different plate geometries and edge conditions it has been shown that structures can be modified to obtain more desirable dynamic characteristics of the structure.
The results showed that additional stiffness either by changing edge conditions or additional stiffer geometry causes the natural frequencies of a structure to be increased, and as a result the gap between natural frequencies is increased.