This report is to investigate the properties of an I section beam when subjected to a pure torsional load.
I beams are generally used in structures where loads supported by the beam cause bending. The I beam section is ideally suited to supporting high bending loads. Similarly circular shafts or tubes are most suited to torsional loading conditions, and where possible the two different structural members are chosen by the loads imposed on them. However it is not always possible for an I beam to be subjected to just bending loads, or a shaft to be subjected to only torsional loads, so it is important to be able to accurately predict the effects of torsional or bending loads on the relevant beams.
A straight I beam section approximately 1m in length will be loaded with a pure torsional load. Strain gauge readings attached to the beams surface will be used to monitor the strains in the beam as the load is applied.
FE Analysis and theoretical calculations will be compared to these experimental results and comparisons made between the three methods.
As already stated, I beam sections are used for supporting loads in bending. However design constraints may lead to the beam being subjected to more than just plain bending loads. An example of such a scenario would be fixing services, piping or electrical wiring for instance to an I beam structural support section. If this load is attached to the I section away from its central axis, then an eccentric loading condition is created, and the beam is no longer subjected to pure bending loads.
It is therefore important that torsional loads on the beam be taken into account when designing structures to ensure the operational stresses do not exceed the designated limits.
This section will detail the procedure for each of the three methods being investigated in this report, namely:
The yield loads for the 3 methods discussed in this report can be seen summarised in Table 4.2.
The stress profiles of the I beam section at yield load can be seen in Figure 4.1.
This report has investigated an I beam section subjected to pure torsional loads and compared three methods for estimating the performance of the beam.
The results obtained showed that assumptions made in the theoretical calculations greatly affect the results compared to actual beams assumed to be operating under the same conditions. When using theoretical calculations to determine the stresses in an I beam section subjected to pure torsional load it is important to account for the assumptions made by the theory.
The results have shown that Saint-Venants principle when applied to the beam used for this investigation proved incorrect, and results obtained through theoretical calculations were lower that those found experimentally and through the use of FEA.
The theoretical calculations assume that warping in the section occurs, where as the method used to apply torsional load in the experimental lab prevented warping. The FE results which were initially modelled on the experimental results showed good accuracy to the experimental results. Reconfiguring the FE model to closer resemble beam conditions assumed by the theoretical calculations yielded results in closer agreement with the theoretical calculations.
The effects of warping in the beam due to a pure torsional load has been shown to effect the stresses in the beam considerably.
The theoretical calculations and revised FE model restraints produced yield loads which were almost half of those found by experimental and initial FE results.
Therefore when designing non-circular sections in situations that may subject the section to torsional loads, it is important to take into account the end constraints imposed on to the section in order to accurately predict the stresses under operational conditions.