Pumps are used to impart energy in to a fluid, there are two main varieties of pump, axial flow, centrifugal. The Tesla pump is a form of centrifugal pump and was developed by a famous scientist & Inventor called Nikola Tesla.
Tesla patented a new principle which utilised the properties of adhesion and viscous shear as a means to pump a fluid. With this principle he was able to design a new type of pump that used the same principles of a centrifugal pump without employing the typical impeller. This design of pump is still relatively unknown and is used little in industry.
It is the purpose of this Project to investigate the properties of the Tesla pump to develop an in depth understanding of the pumps operating characteristics.
The aim of this project is to design, build and test a Tesla pump.
The goal is to prototype the design, and gain quantitive data of the pumps performance through practical testing and theoretical analysis. The pumps performance will be compared to published practical and theoretical data.
Nikola Tesla was a famous scientists and inventor who was regarded as one of the leading innovative engineers of the 19 th and 20 th Centuries.
He is best known for discovering alternating current electric power, polyphase power distribution and the A.C motor.
He was Born 10 th July 1856 in Croatia and studied electrical engineering at an Austrian Polytechnic. In 1881 he worked for the American Telephone Company in Budapest where he was the chief electrician to the company. In 1882 he moved to France to work as an electrical engineer, it is during this time that Tesla first conceived the idea of creating electrical currents using rotating magnetic fields, later patented in 1888.
In 1884 Tesla moved to the US, where he started working for the Edison Machine Works, he progressed from simple electrical engineering work to completely redesigning the companies continuous current dynamos.
Much of Tesla's work during the late 19 th century was spent pioneering modern electrical engineering. In 1888 Tesla demonstrated his brushless alternate-current induction motor to the Institute of Electrical Engineers (IEEE), and in 1893 demonstrated his invention of wireless communication.
Tesla worked for most of this professional life towards his dream of the ultimate flying machine. He saw the flying machines of the day to be nothing more than "a toy - a sporting play thing". Tesla thought that the aeroplane could never become commercially practical owing to its fatal defects. These defects he saw as the designs susceptibility to the atmospheric environment, sudden down currents, turbulence etc. Tesla thought that the aeroplane was always subject to these unpredictably phenomena and would not make a sound business proposition. His solution to this problem was to design a heavier than air flying machine, but without wings or propellers. It would use electric motors to power the machine, with electrical energy being supplied wirelessly.
However his ideas changed when he saw the technological advances in gasoline engines. It was searching for a new means of obtaining power sources that Tesla hit upon the idea of using a fluids property of adhesion and viscosity as a means of energy transformation.
The principle of the new engine was to use these properties of any fluid to transmit power through the fluid medium.
Tesla first came across the idea for this when using a single disk variant of his pump design to transport mercury used in his experiments. Tesla used a simple air blower to demonstrate his invention. This consisted of several disk approximately three inches in diameter mounted on a central shaft spaced a small distance apart. As the shaft is spun air is aggravated and expelled at the disks periphery. This creates suction at the centre of the disks where air enters through an opening in the disk replacing air that is being expelled.
Literature relevant to the field of "shear force pumps" is very limited compared to other areas of pump design. A great variety of books on pump design is available to the engineer. However there has been some technical papers that have provided a great deal of useful information.
As discussed in section 0 the origin of multi-disk pump originated from Nikola Tesla, who issued patents on variations of the design, one for "Fluid Propulsion" and the other for a "Turbine". Tesla publicly demonstrated his designs prior to issuing the patents and reports of Tesla's design were reported the semi-technical press of the time.
Little research was done into the design until the 1960's where some technical papers were written to investigate the design and achievable efficiencies of the design. Analytical papers providing theoretical investigation have since been done using computer simulations of the fluid flow.
Much time was spent researching and sourcing relevant literature on the Tesla rotor design, the majority of which has been published for the Tesla Turbine design. However there are some papers devoted to the investigation of the Tesla Pump or compressor.
Research has also been done around the subject area in fields such as Boundary Layer theory and Fluid mechanics.
Literature worthy of discussion in this section is briefly reviewed.
"Fundamentals of Thermal-Fluid" Sciences by Cengel & Turner, 2001
This book gives a good understanding of simple fluid mechanics and boundary layer theory
"Boundary Layer theory" by Herman Schlichting, 1979
This book is an in-depth review of boundary layer theory. Of particular interest was the exact solution for flow near a rotating disk using the Navier-Strokes equation. This is particularly useful for visualising the flow around the plates in the pump design. Studies of rotating disks enclosed in a housing are also covered in this book.
"Tesla Pump Comments" by George Wiseman, 1996
This paper describes the author's process of designing efficient Tesla Pumps. It describes a practical approach to the design of a simple multi-disk pump, and goes someway in to the history of the design and practical applications.
"A Quantitve Analysis of the Tesla Turbomachine" by Glenn. A. Baris, 2001
This paper provides a quantitive analysis of the Tesla design by comparing it to the traditional centrifugal machine.
It reproduces basic calculations critical in the design of efficient multi-disk pump designs.
"Numerical Solution of the Flow Field in a Friction-Type Turbine" Diploma thesis by Rey Ladino, National University of Colombia, 2004
This thesis is an in-depth study of flow field around the multi-disk principle. It uses computer simulations to model the flow fields around the designs, and provides detailed results and analysis.
Of particular interest to this project are two papers in the Journal of Engineering for Power, January 1963. Published in the Transactions of ASME
"An Analytical & Experimental Investigation of Multiple Disk Pumps & Compressors" by Professor Warren Rice.
This technical paper provides quantitive results through theoretical "first approximation" analysis and practical testing of a Multi-disk pump, compressor and blower. The theory predicts maximum pump performance, with practical results indicating achievable performance figures.
"Investigation of a Shear Force Pump" by S.H Hasinger & L.G Kehrt
This technical paper follows and in-depth study of the shear force pump design. Mathematical equations are developed to predict the performance of the pump, losses in the system are taken into account in the solution. Practical testes are presentated to confirm the theory.
In order to explain the Tesla pumps principle of operation it is necessary to cover some basic fluid mechanic principles.
The actual manufacture of the pump components started early on in the design phase (week 4 semeaster 1) with the workshop working from preliminary drawings showing basic component dimensions. Detailed drawings were passed to the workshop on completion. This was not an ideal design process but working to the tight time schedule meant compromises were necessary. All final design manufacturing drawings were in the workshop by week 7 of semester 1
Work still needs to be carried out on the design of the test equipment, mountings for the drive motor in order to measure the torque required to drive the pump need to be designed and fabricated. Toothed pulley's and belt need to be source which will be used to drive the pump, and final decisions on testing procedures needs to be worked out.
The testing is planned to take place during week 0 or semester 2, and as discussed is reliant on the pump being manufactured in time.
The components required for the test rig are:
Electric motor to drive the pump
A motor has been sourced which is complete with electronic speed control. The motor its self is an A.C induction motor rated at 0.55Kw @ 2800 Rev/min. This will be coupled to the pump drive shaft via a toothed belt drive.
A toothed belt was chosen in order to prevent slip in the drive system and eliminated the need for correct belt tension to ensure maximum torque is transmitted as is the case for Vee belts.
The Final operating speed of the pump is yet to be determined, although it was envisaged to run the pump up to speeds of 9000 Rev/min, this would require running the pump on a 1:4 ratio, so that pump would be running at 2250 Rev/min.
Pressure gauges
Pressure tapings will be required on the inlet and outlet of the pump in order to calculate the head produced by the pump in all configurations.
Flow meter (or other means of gaining flow rate)
The non-scientific approach to measuring the flow rate of the pump will be utilised. This simply consists of timing how long the pump takes to transfer a known quantity of fluid.
Containers to hold the fluid being pumped
tachometer to measure pump speed
Instrument to measure torque
To date the project is running approximately on schedule. The pump design has been completed and has been transferred to the workshop for manufacture. Some of the components have been completed and nearly all of the components are in some stage of production.
As outlined in the project plan submitted at the beginning of the project, the important mile stones for the first semester were:
This report has detailed the work done on the project, and given details on the overall progress of what has been achieved, and what is yet to be achieved.
The design of the pump, and much of the manufacturing has either been completed or is in the final stages of completion. In terms of following the overall project plan for the design and manufacture of the pump, this has been achieved. The requirement for a completed pump prototype design scheduled for completion by the end of semester 1 (16 th December 2005) looks to be an achievable goal.
Sincere thanks must go to the technicians in the Mechanical workshop, Namely Chris Boram for help during the initial design stages and sourcing of components, and Warwick Major for help on the design and manufacturing or the pump components to very high standards.
On going work has been discussed, and a revised time plan has been issued.
Testing of the design is scheduled for early 2006, theoretical analysis of the design will be done in parallel with testing.
Results for testing are planned to be completed by week 4, and all data analysed by week 6 semester 2.
The overall progress of the project appears to be following the envisaged plan, with the pump prototype very close to completion. Analytical work has been more complex than envisaged, and will required more attention.
Gaining performance data of the prototype is the key requirement of the project and will hopefully be completed as planned.