To this end the book is divided into nine lucid chapters that follow a clear progression, enabling the reader to understand Burke's development of ideas with relative ease. Introduced by The Study of Elites, a brief assessment of the methodology used and problems encountered, Burke then analyses and compares different aspects of the patriciate - Structure, Political Functions, Economic Base, Style of Life, Training, Attitudes and Values and Patronage of the Arts. The book concludes with a chapter devoted to change, analysing the 'decline' of the elite, which he identifies in terms of numbers but certainly not in wealth or power.
The most successful chapters of the book are those that describe the social, political and economic structures of the patricians of Venice and Amsterdam. Such sections are able to combine coherent analysis of each city separately, with interesting comparisons, as well as some conclusions. Burke generally argues that the differences between the groups were a result of their differing structures; the Venetian patriciate was part of a formally defined nobility, whereas the burgomasters in Amsterdam were not in any formally defined elite, but were high in the social ladder due to their power and wealth. This is not to say that they do not provide some noteworthy details, but as a chapter they often provide less comparison and are more descriptive. This is however surprising as Burke is Professor of Cultural History.
Burke's enquiry focuses on evidence from 563 biographies of doges and proctors in Venice and burgomasters in Amsterdam respectively, thus there is generally an analysis of the elite from within. This provides a detailed and informative picture of patriciate life and attitudes, enhanced further by Burke's comparative approach. Although such a methodology was not new when the book was written, many of studies undertaken 'generally focussed on one region, and were comparative only by implication'. On some occasions this does mean that there is a lack of conclusion, with greater emphasis on comparison; resulting in questions being raised but not answered.
The evidence used means that the book generally lacks the perspective from the lower echelons of society, from women and from children. It would have been fruitful to consider the Venetian patriciate from the viewpoint of their poorer noble counterparts, who often resented such increasingly oligarchic bodies as the Council of Ten and the State Inquisitors, that tended to favour members of the great families. For example the guilds, who acted as the main link between society and the state, 'are useful observation posts from which to view grandiose processes'. Recognizing encounters with other social groups would have represented a greater portrayal.
The fundamental argument of Burke's study is the discussion of a shift from entrepreneur to rentier of both the Venetian and Amsterdam patriciate. This contends that the elite moved to their country villas, exploited the land and collected the rent, no longer interested in innovation in mercantilism. This evidence seems to indicate a shift in Amsterdam towards the country house and thus a rentier approach around 1700, later than traditionally thought. Burke is wary of the fact that it is possible for there to be an entrepreneur landowner, as well as a rentier without a country residence, but he argues that the overall picture created should be enough for analysis. However, Burke still asserts that there 'is some evidence for a shift out of trade into land in this period'. For this he looks towards factors pushing the Venetian elite out of trade, the loss of Cyprus and the arrival of the English and Dutch merchant ships, and the pull of the land, namely the trebling of wheat prices between 1550 and 1590. However, this was done initially, especially in Venice, with the same profit seeking spirit with which the elite once engaged in trade, Once they became comfortable in their
It is also important to place such an evolution in context. Burke argues that there was a decline in the mercantile activity of Venice. However, Venice was still 'the metropolitan market for a rich, densely populated area' and thus there was expansion in smaller scale and shorter distance trade, mainly in local products such as olive oil.
 This relatively new approach sometimes created problems for the author in finding a balance between comparison and conclusion, although this is not a problem with his main argument. The book provides an important portrayal, not only of the structure of the patriciate, but also investigating further into their attitudes. What needs to be considered is that it is such a large subject, condensed into a relatively short study; hence, it is not necessarily every detail that is of great importance, but the main ideas and overall character of the patriciate that Burke manages to create.