The It was born out of their reaction to outmoded historical thought and methodology in early twentieth century France and its growth led it to be one of the dominant historical schools in the proceeding century. Thus 'there is no one historical journal that is more influential in the world today'. This essay will to look at continuity and departure through these two periods thematically, and attempt to form a conclusion as to whether the 'Age of Braudel' conserved or contradicted original Although Bloch and Febvre differed in emphasis, for example Bloch's commitment to geography was less than Febvre's whose dedication to sociology was greater, they held collective ideals for which the The main source for an insight into Braudel's historical thought is Yet it is not only his scholarship that is of interest, for his actions at the helm of the Annales ship go a long way into demonstrating what direction he was taking it, and whether this was consistent with the aims of Bloch and Febvre.
As stated, the Bloch and Febvre thus wanted to widen such a narrow scope to encompass all aspects of history, especially social and economic. He was confronted with a mass of archival material on princes, finances, armies, land and peasants, used for the traditional history which he was abandoning. In 1934 Braudel discovered the registers of Ragusa at Dubrovnik containing information on ships, trade goods, insurance rates and business deals; 'for the first time' he 'saw the Mediterranean of the sixteenth century'. Yet Part III, ' For example, Braudel attributes two factors for the slowness of Phillip II to act. First, in terms of Spain's financial exhaustion: 'It is therefore difficult to see by what aberration this exhausted country was to persist in the war in the Mediterranean', of which Braudel asks 'was the Prudent King really responsible?" Second, the physical problems of communication: 'Phillip II had to wait for reports to arrive from very distant places before taking decisions... So there can be no doubt: Spain waged an unremitting struggle against the obstacle of distance." Braudel thus saw events as merely 'surface disturbances, crests of foam that the tides of history carry on their strong backs' and to understand the past, it is thus necessary to dive beneath these waves.
In rejecting the traditional history of the It was not only concerned with the Revolt of the Netherlands and the rise of absolutism, but analysed the struggle between to rival classes; the declining nobility and the rising bourgeoisie. He did not utilize Bloch's innovative analysis of agricultural patterns of production or Febvre's idea that religious literary and cultural activity was guided by the mental tools of the epoch. Thus he ignored what seemed to many historians in the 1940s to be important historiographical achievements of the first two editors of the
Nevertheless, Braudel extended the most significant ideological tenet of the Between 1920 and 1933 in the University of Strasbourg there were daily discussions between Bloch and Febvre, who were surrounded by an extremely lively interdisciplinary group. 'The milieu favoured intellectual innovation and facilitated the exchange of ideas across interdisciplinary areas.' Febvre was very much taken by the ideas of the psychologist Charles Blondel, while Bloch preferred the ideas of the sociologist Maurice Halbrachs. Bloch preferred to show collective practices, and thus Febvre was critical of the lack of the individual in his study on Nevertheless, both Bloch and Febvre wanted to 'decode the mental universe', using psychology and sociology.
Braudel welcomed this interdisciplinary approached that he had inherited. In He stated that it was crucial to embrace all fields to truly comprehend humanity: 'each of them is a door open to the entirety of the social'. Not only did he bring the However, in his scholarship Braudel did not utilise the social sciences as his forefathers had. In his He has little to say on capitalist values, industry, thrift, discipline and enterprise. In this primarily economic work there is a great unwillingness to allow any autonomy to ideas or culture. Thus Braudel never intended to concern himself in this study with What should be remembered are Braudel's views on the relationship between history and the social sciences: 'He is not worthy of the name historian if he does not juxtapose some of them; cultural and social vistas, cultural and political, social and economic, economic and political'.
The interdisciplinary approach was one of a variety of methods the Annales embodied in order to produce 'In this way Bloch and Febvre between them promulgated an idea of For example, Bloch's And in his study of French rural history, an extension of the It can be seen how this was conserved by Braudel; 'Braudellian history's greatest ambition was to capture the totality of the social realm in a single swoop'. Thus 'in this respect he differs greatly from Febvre, despite his praise for 'If more than 25 years of Braudel's life have had economics as their horizon, we should not, therefore, forget his continually proclaimed desire for total history'.
In attempting Bloch favoured rigorous statistical analysis, and argued that medieval history had been reduced to mystery and ritual, severed from the study of modern history. For example, from the Florentine Catasto of 1427 the Thus in terms of his scholarship and the leadership of the institutions of the
So far one of the central themes in Braudel's work has not been discussed, geographic history and its structural implications, which had the most ambivalent relationship with the The conceptual guide for Febvre's and subsequently Braudel's interest in geographical history, or geohistory as it was later termed by Braudel, was the geographer Paul Vidal de la Blache, Febvre's mentor. Yet on the notion of geographic determinism Febvre 'chose the Vidalian notion of possibility... Nature was not a neutral force that conditioned human life; it was humanized right from the beginning and was already profoundly transformed by man'. The This complemented the break with traditional French historiography that focused on the short term event. Between 1929 and 1939 45.9 percent of articles in the
It was this notion of the Those who had emphasized the historical role of geography, such as Vidal de la Blache, Bloch and Febvre, had not succeeded in finding a way of weaving it in with, for example, social activity. They had generally treated such geographical considerations as a separate chapter as background; for example, Febvre introduced his thesis on 'In the first edition of The thesis was divided into three sections; Braudel analysed the mountains and plains, coastlines and islands, climate, land routes and sea routes. The aim was to show that the environment had its own history and that the events and general trends could not be understood without it.
Thus Braudel conserved the tradition of Bloch and Febvre in interlacing geographical with other social and economic elements, but historians have often cited that he went too far from the Although there is not enough room here to give the debate the analysis it deserves, it needs to be discussed as it was the idea that could fundamentally separate Braudel from the 'In the eyes of its author, Braudel's history is, above all, structural history'. Febvre remarked: 'Structure? a fashionable word, I know; it even sprawls through the Annales occasionally, a little too much for my taste'. Bloch and Febvre remained faithful to anthropocentrism: 'man was the sole preoccupation of historians; he was the meaning of their work'. 'But, this interpretation is misleading'. For example, when analysing who deserved credit for the Christian victory at the Battle of Lepanto Braudel asked himself: 'Don John, the admiral?' and responded: 'Yes, undoubtedly'. Man was 'free' to do what he pleased in his environment, but was constrained by nature which was more fixed and permanent, thus it became the determining force. Braudel was not comfortable with structuralism that emphasized systematicity, mathematization and logical implication. The structural history that Braudel adopted valued 'flexibility and descriptive concreteness above systematically and abstract rigor'. In any case it was not the Maybe this was too much for Bloch and Febvre, but was it enough for the annalist of his relationship to early Annales to conclude on his contradictory nature? He did not remove all human agency;
In the key areas of the Yet was this enough to assert that the age of Braudel was a clear break? Braudel clearly continued the rejection of traditional political and diplomatic history that Bloch and Febvre so vehemently disliked, notably in his thesis, In doing so he fostered the continuing association between history and the social sciences. Some of his worked often neglected the fields of psychology and sociology. For example his three volume economic history of France did not discuss capitalist values, but it was planned that Febvre would write such a complementary volume, before his death. What were of greater significance were the institutions he created and helped expand, such as the In terms of Yet it is in the main theme of The notion of geographic determinism put forward seems to contradict the ideas of human agency that Bloch and Febvre favoured. However, as shown this is far too simplistic an approach; Braudel was far more sophisticated in his analysis, and although gave the ultimate determining role to the environment, he gave man a limited, but 'free' role within this history. Thus it may be possible to talk of two Braudels; the scholar, and the 'president' of the In his scholarship Braudel often did not use all of the  Known principally for his writings, Braudel was nonetheless principally a builder, more effective in the solidity of institutions that he ran than by the originality of his themes." As heir to Febvre to the Annales throne he was 'devoted and faithful to the man he succeeded',