This experiment covered some of the growth kinetics, for which the growth curve of Serratia marcescens was determined by measuring the absorbance using a spectrophotometer of the culture growing in a side-arm flask at 10 minute intervals during incubation at 37C in a shaking water bath. As a result, the Lag Phase began from 0 min to 10 min, the Acceleration Phase began from 10 min to 20 min, then there was 90 min (20 min - 110 min) Exponential Growth Phase, after which the growth began to slow down (Retardation Phase) and finally entered the (Stationary Phase) at about 140 minutes. The specific growth rate "" was calculated as 1.02 hour -1, and the culture doubling time "t d" was calculated as 0.68 hour.
The growth of bacteria is a result of many changes in the cell, including the change of the size, and the proportion of cellular components. Therefore, it is easy to measure only one or two parameters rather than all the changes as a measurement of the growth. Under simple conditions, the growth curve of a single bacterial culture shows several phases:
The Lag Phase, where bacteria are becoming "acclimatized" to the new environment. Though no growth is detectable using changes in absorbance as the measure, the cell is highly active with the proportions of cellular components changing.
The Acceleration Phase, during which the change in the growth become detectable. This results from the fact that not all cells begin to grow at the same time.
The Exponential Growth Phase, in which the bacteria population growth in maximum rate and the number increases rapidly with time. A plot of log of the absorbance against time is now linear, which in turn can be used to find out the growth rate using the equation:
The Retardation Phase, cell growth begins to slow down as a consequence of the using up of nutrients and the build up of the toxin.
The Stationary Phase, growth appears to cease, no more increase in the absorbance, though metabolic events still occurs within the cells.
The Death Phase, capacity of the surviving cells decreases, the nutrients used up and the toxic metabolic by-products builds up.
The aim of the experiment was to follow the growth curve of Serratia marcescens in nutrient broth by using a side-arm flask and a spectrophotometer at 30C. While, a viable count was carried out at the beginning and end of the exponential phase of the growth in order to prove that not only the mass but also the number of cells increased during growth.
The experimental procedure and materials were used followed the instruction of the lab manual. For the viable count part, the initial bacterial count were carried out with 10 -4 10 -5, and 10 -6 dilution of the start of the exponential phase of the bacteria culture to give a number about 4 per plate, 40 per plate, and 400 per plate. While, the final viable count of Serratia marcescens were carried out by using 10 -6 10 -7, and 10 -8 dilution of the end of the exponential phase of the bacteria culture to give a number about 5 per plate, 50 per plate, and 500 per plate.
As shown in figure 1 on the semi-log graph paper, there is a very short Lag phase for the first 10 minutes, and then the acceleration phase begins. This lasts until about 20 mins when the maximum growth rate (Exponential Phase) is reached. This lasts until 110 minute, where it began to slow down (Retardation Phase) and finally entered the (Stationary Phase) at about 140 minutes. The Death Phase was not determined on this figure. All "Phases" are labeled on the graph. The curve of the Exponential Phase was straight, though some point lay outside this best straight line of fit.
The specific growth rate "" was calculated using the equation (refer to appendix 2):.
As a result "" = 1.02 hour -1,
The culture doubling time "t d" was calculated using the equation: td = (ln 2) /
As a result "td" = 0.68 hour.
The result of the viable count is not included in this report.