Primates, like all mammals, are heterodonts. This means they have distinctive categories of teeth in terms of function and morphology. There are four different kinds of teeth; the anterior peg-shaped incisors and dagger-shaped canines and the posterior broad, cusped, molars and pre-molars.
The function and structure of primate species' specials senses are strongly related to their respective activity patterns. Nocturnal species (of which all but one are members of the suborder Prosimii) are in general relatively small, solitary and insectivorous. By contrast, diurnal species are comparatively larger, live in social groups and are mainly folivorous or frugivorous. All of these variables, in addition to the simple fact that one group is active during daylight and the other in the dark, produce shared special sense characteristics.
A species is the fundamental unit of nature. In practice species are usually recognised and defined in purely phenetic terms. As Mark Ridley (2004) puts it, a species forms a "phenetic cluster". This means that a group of organisms that shares more physical or behavioural characteristics with each other than with any other group is classified as a separate species. However, there is always variation within a group of organism and the phenetic characteristics which define that group may not be present in all individuals. For example, humans, like all hominids, have distinctive molars in that there are five cusps which form a Y shape. A taxonomist may use a feature such as this to characterise a species. Some humans do not possess one of the five cusps however, and the pattern of their molars forms more of a + shape. Although these individuals lack a defining characteristic of our species, we would not classify them as a separate organism!
To cope with this problem, several theoretical frameworks have been proposed by biologists in order to define the concept of a species. The biological species concept is probably the most widely accepted of these. Ernst Mayr (1963) explains it as follows, "Species are groups of interbreeding natural populations that are reproductively isolated from other such groups". The key point here is that species share a gene pool and so also share many physical characteristics. Some phenetically different species can interbreed, for example horses and donkeys, but supporters of the biological species concept point to the fact that these matings usually result in sterile or inviable offspring, which will not pass their genes on and are therefore insignificant in terms of evolution.
The specific mate recognition concept proposed by Paterson (1991) is very similar to the biological model, defining species as populations which identify potential mates within themselves only. Again, this highlights the notion of a species being an interbreeding genetic cluster. This approach was used to identify several species of bush babies which, although morphologically similar, used different mating calls. Phenetic species concepts have been suggested, but as I pointed out above, this does not adequately define a species as there is much intra-group variation, and also inter-group similarity. Another non-biological species concept is based on the idea that different species will occupy different ecological niches.
The application of any of these species concepts results in very similar classification of the animals in the world, as any group of interbreeding organisms is highly likely to share certain morphological characteristics and also to occupy the same ecological niche.
The process of speciation generally involves the evolution of an isolating barrier between two or more subgroups of a population. This may reveal some bias towards the biological species concept, but it is safe to say that most species are reproductively isolated. Theodius Dobzhansky (1970) split potential isolating barriers into two categories: (1) prezygotic barriers such as different mating seasons, mating calls and incompatible genitalia (2) postzygotic barriers where hybrid offspring are produced but are inviable or infertile. All such isolating barriers arise due to natural selection, but there are various hypotheses as to what causes a population to diverge.
The most widely accepted model of speciation is allopatric. In this scenario a population of previously interbreeding organisms becomes geographically separated. This may be due to a physical barrier such as a river or mountain range, the migration of part of a population or the extinction of the intermediate section of a population, leaving the fringes isolated. Once geographically separated, gene flow halts between the subgroups and over time environmental pressures and genetic drift cause isolating barriers to evolve in one or all of the populations. Richard Klein (1999) suggests that this type of speciation occurred in the early
There are two other less widely accepted hypotheses as to how speciation may occur. Parapatric speciation results when a geographically continuous population occupies different habitats. Boyd and Silk (2003) offer the example of baboons which live in widely different environments, from savannah to tropical rainforests. Although not reproductively isolated, the baboons living in the savannah will be slightly differently adapted to those living in the forests. Interbreeding occurs between these phenetically different populations but will usually result in less viable offspring. Thus, over time natural selection will favour populations which breed only within their own habitat and isolating barriers may evolve.
The third speciation hypothesis, sympatric speciation, suggests that a population may diverge even when occupying the same habitat and geographical area. Slight differences between subpopulations, such as different food types, may be strong enough factors for selection to occur against hybridisation. Of these theories the most widely favoured by biologists is the allopatric speciation model.