There are many reasons that an environmental programme should be implemented in any business. The global society is becoming more aware of environmental issues, as they are more widely publicised. One of the biggest issues is that of the finite supply of fossil fuels. One day, the world's supplies of coal and gas will run out, and other means will have to be found to supply our power. Not only this, but the burning of fossil fuels to create energy is also harmful to the environment. The burning contributes towards global warming, acid rain and the depletion of the ozone layer. If we continue to burn fossil fuels at the current rate, then it's predicted the world's average temperature will increase by 2c over the next 100 years (Webster, 2000). This temperature rise will change the global climate, making some parts of the world into arid desert, whilst other parts will be inundated with rain. The polar ice caps will also start to melt, causing sea levels to rise, meaning costal cities could disappear totally, including parts of London. Another major issue is the amount of water we use. In the hospitality industry, only 5% of water used is consumed by people, the rest being used for cleaning and food preparation. As global warming reduces the amount of rain we have, and the water table lowers, we need to consider our use, especially here in the Thames Valley, where water is scarcer than other parts of the UK (Webster, 2000). The other issue is the amount of waste the modern world creates. Only 4% of waste from the hospitality industry is recycled, with the rest being sent to landfill sites or incinerated, which releases harmful gases into the atmosphere.
For a business such as the Wychwood Forest Hotel, the main focus should be on the management of energy, water and waste. The process of environmental management is not as expensive as you may think, as small changes can make a big difference. It is far easier and cheaper to prevent the pollution, than to repair its damage. The hotel will reap the rewards of an environmental programme, with cost savings made, as demonstrated by the likes of Hilton and Inter-Continental Hotel Group. The programme will also ensure new environmental legislation is met, and improve the consumer's image of the hotel. The 'green' consumer is a growing market who demands 'green' products. On a global scale, the benefits will be reaped by future generations.
In order to implement a successful environmental management plan, it's important that you consider the points in the following report and decide on the most viable recommendations, and train staff to follow the new procedures. You may also wish to appoint an environment work group or manager to assess performance and look for further innovative ideas.
I do hope you will seriously consider developing an environmental management programme. Hopefully, the following report will be of use to you at the Wychwood Forest Hotel, and maybe at your sister hotels in time.
Yours sincerely,
Currently, the performance of the Wychwood Forest Hotel with regards to environmental awareness is mixed.
There are several examples of good practice employed by the hotel. In the conference rooms, there is plentiful natural daylight, which helps to keep lighting bills lower. In hotels, the lighting bill can account for as much as 20% of the energy bill (The Carbon Trust, 2004). The use of natural light and heat sources is an important aspect to consider in the design of an energy efficient building. In the hospitality industry about 4% of waste is recycled (Webster, 2000). However, at the Wychwood Forest Hotel, the information suggests that this figure is higher, with all glass and cardboard from the restaurant, kitchen and bar areas being recycled. Green Globe (1994) suggests that a hotel bin contains 10% glass and 33% paper/card, so the recycling carried out by the Wychwood Forest Hotel will reduce this proportion. From personal experience, it has been discovered that there are many hotels that don't recycle at all. For example, Cowley Manor in Cheltenham doesn't recycle any waste, with the main reason being the cost of collection. This seems to be a concern for many hotels implementing not just a recycling scheme, but also an environmental management programme in general (Webster, 2000). The baler that was purchased to reduce the volume of cardboard was a sound investment for the hotel. As the cardboard is paid for by the collector, the hotel is making money from its waste. A sound practice for the hotel would be to reinvest this money into further environmental management practices.
Some of the practices at the hotel are sufficient but still have room for improvement. Although the insulation of the hotel meets all building regulations, the amount installed was compromised by the appearance of the hotel. Just 100mm of insulation in the roof of the hotel can reduce heat loss by 50-70% (Webster, 2000). However, Siegle (2003) suggests that insulation should be at least 150mm thick, which would reduce heat loss further. The reduction in heat loss would of course reduce energy bills. Although the hotel owns a petrol-run car, which produces less nitrogen oxide and sulphur dioxide than a diesel run car, the use of it should still be kept to a minimum, and full loads should be transported wherever possible, in both directions for the journey (Webster, 2000). The Best Western Papago Inn in Scottsdale operates an electric vehicle for running their errands (Enz and Siguaw, 1999). The Wychwood Forest Hotel could consider an alternative fuel for their car. There is a frequent laundry collection at the hotel, which suggests that all linen is changed on a daily basis. This should be reduced, both to save water and detergents going into the waste stream, but to reduce the number of visits made by the collection lorry which emits carbon dioxide and other noxious gases into the atmosphere (The Green Fuel Company, 2003). At present the hotel has 4 bins for general waste, which is not a considerable amount. At Cowley Manor, there are 4 of these bins, but the hotel is 3 times smaller than the Wychwood Forest Hotel. This demonstrates that the Wychwood Forest Hotel isn't producing excessive amounts of waste, but more could be done to recycle. After implementing a strict recycling programme, the Hyatt Regency Chicago now recycles 70% of their waste, and has reduced waste collection charges by 50% (Enz and Siguaw, 1999).
There are also some poor systems practiced by the Wychwood Forest Hotel. Although all glass and cardboard from public areas is recycled, the waste produced in guest rooms is all sent straight to landfill, as the separation is seen as a poor use of a chambermaid's time. However, guests could be encouraged to recycle themselves in the rooms. As long as initiatives are explained, recycling bins could be placed in room (Green Globe, 1994). The menu in the restaurant at the Wychwood Forest Hotel is extensive and varied. Although this is advantageous to the guests, it could be creating large amounts of waste in the kitchen, both from unused food that is no longer fit for consumption, and from meat trimmings and vegetable peelings. Another major concern for the hotel must be their energy and water consumptions. It is possible for them to benchmark their usage against other hotels of a similar type. The Wychwood Forest Hotel uses 120kwh of electricity per square metre annually, which is an excessive level of usage, with 70-80kwh/m 2 being a satisfactory level (The International Business Leaders Forum and WWF, 2005). The hotel also uses 232kwh per square metre of gas. This is also an excessive level of usage, with a satisfactory level being 190-200kwh/m 2. It's predicted that 20% of energy used in the hospitality industry could be saved (Webster, 2000). The water usage is also high, but not excessive. Water consumption per guest is 0.56m 3, with a satisfactory level being 0.35-0.41 m 3 (The International Business Leaders Forum and WWF, 2005). The calculations for the above figures can be found in appendix 1. Only 5% of water used in hotels is actually consumed by people, while the rest is mainly used in cleaning and the preparation and cooking of food (Webster, 2000). Also, only 10% of the water used in rooms is used by the guest, and the rest is used for cleaning by chambermaids. An important measure that can be taken is to check for, and fix, all leaks. It is estimated that 25% of the water in the mains system is lost through leakages (Webster, 2000).
Although there is some effort being made by the Wychwood Forest Hotel to act in an environmentally friendly manner, there is considerable room for improvement, particularly in the areas of energy and water consumption. Another area that needs consideration is the expansion of their recycling practices. Small changes to their systems will help to reduce waster produced, and energy and water consumed. Not only will these changes benefit the environment, but they will also result in reduced costs for the hotel.
As previously mentioned, the Wychwood Forest Hotel has some poor environmental practices that need to be improved. They are problems that have been overcome by other organisations within the industry. Guest waste is not recycled at the Wychwood Forest Hotel, as it's considered a poor use of chambermaids' time. However, the Colony Hotel in Maine has rattan bins in all the rooms which are split into sections for cans, paper, glass and other waste - and they have had no adverse comments regarding this scheme from guests (Enz and Siguaw, 1999). Another suggestion by Enz and Siguaw is to replace all individual toiletry bottles with refillable wall mounted dispensers. Small bottles are wasteful in two senses; the bottles are rarely recycled and there is often product left in the bottle that is wasted (personal experience, 2005).
Another area of wastage is the kitchen. The menu is extensive and consequentially has potential for large amounts of waste generated by vegetable and meat trimmings, as well as unused and leftover food. Again, the Colony Hotel in Maine is an example of industry best practice. They compost all of their kitchen waste and use it to fertilize their 11 acres of land (Enz and Siguaw, 1999). Although the grounds at the Wychwood Forest Hotel are likely to be smaller than this, this practice could still be employed. Not only would this system reduce the amount of waste sent to landfill
sites, but it would also reduce the use of fertilisers on the garden.
A major concern for the Wychwood Forest Hotel should be their energy consumption, both of gas and electricity. Energy is the first cost centre to see the results of an environmental management programme, and also the easiest area in which to make savings (Webster, 2000). L'Hotel in Toronto, formerly a Canadian and Pacific Resort Hotel, installed energy saving light bulbs throughout the hotel, and saves $25,000 a year on their energy bill (IHEI, 1993). As well as reducing energy use, some hotels are changing their energy supply to reduce their impact on the environment. All Hilton hotels, leisure clubs and offices in the UK are supplied by 100% renewable energy (Hilton International, 2006).
Another concern for the Wychwood Forest Hotel ought to be their water consumption per guest. With water supplies low in the South East (Webster, 2000), it's important to conserve water. "Low flow" shower heads were installed in a Jamaican hotel who went on to save 500,000 gallons of water a month as a result. Another hotel to utilise this method of water conservation is the Wallard Inter Continental in Washington DC. They have saved $17,000 in a year and received no adverse comments from guests (Webster, 2000).
Although not such a concern, the waste management at Wychwood Forest Hotel could be improved, with waste being sent to landfill reduced and recycling increased. There are ways to reduce waste in all areas, but the packaging surrounding supplies creates a large amount of waste. Webster (2000) suggests that packaging can be reduced by negotiating with suppliers so that they take the packaging away to reuse or dispose of themselves. This takes the cost of the disposal away from the hotel. The Tamanaco Inter Continental Hotel in Caracas returns soap boxes to the supplier for reuse, and in return, the supplier gives the hotel a rebate of $8,500 (IHEI, 1993). Another example of good practice in the industry is Fort Hotels who in 1989 decided to switch their aerosol cans of cleaning products for trigger spray bottles (IHEI, 1993). These were refillable, and a deal was struck with the supplier to provide the cleaning fluids in a concentrate form which could be mixed with water as and when they were needed. The advantage was that the storage of the chemicals took up less space, but from an environmental point of view, the trigger sprays didn't release CFC gases into the environment as the aerosols did. This system has saved 1 million plastic bottles from going to landfill sites each year (Webster, 2000).
Clearly, it is possible that poor environmental practices can be improved upon, and the case studies previously mentioned are proof of this. The Wychwood Forest Hotel could look at some of these examples for inspiration when building their environmental management programme.
The following is a plan for the Wychwood Forest Hotel to implement environmental management practices. The plan is structured with the most important systems listed first. Ideally, one person should be appointed to oversee the implementation of the plan at an operational level. This person could either be a manager, or a member of staff who is interested in the environment and keen to take on an added responsibility. This would mean that the job was being done by someone who is truly interested in the subject.