In a most crucial and pivotal chapter in Jane Austen's 'Emma', the protagonist of the novel is 'forcibly struck' by self-realisation due to the consequences of her own unforgivable behaviour towards 'poor' Miss Bates. The chapter of study is Chapter VII in Volume III. This central idea of self-realisation and personal understanding is a constant theme running throughout 'Emma', standing out especially in this particular chapter. The same theme can be found similarly in Shakespeare's 'The Winter's Tale'. Act 3, Scene 2 is a highly significant scene in this respect as it is a climatic point in the play when Leontes realises his mistakes and begins on the path to self- knowledge:
What other themes and ideas does this specific scene deal with and how is it significant to the play as a whole? Just how important is Chapter VII, Volume III of 'Emma' to the respective narrative overall? And how do these two texts differ in their organisation of the story?
In the chosen chapter from 'Emma', we, the reader, witness a less attractive and crueller side to Emma as she humiliates Miss Bates at a picnic on Box Hill. In a 'good-humoured' way, the latter tells the group she can easily talk about '"three things very dull indeed"'. Emma responds to this remark in a spiteful and sarcastic fashion:
Emma thinks nothing of her hurtful remark and is only made aware of the damage she has caused at the end of the chapter by Mr. Knightley, who clearly points out the harm she has done: '"It was badly done, indeed!"' Once again it is the father figure of Mr. Knightley who reprimands Emma's bad behaviour out of genuine concern for her. Knightley is constantly guiding Emma and is 'one of the few people who could see faults' in her. An example of this occurs as early on as the opening chapter in a discussion between himself and Emma about her part in Mr Weston and Miss Taylor's 'match':
It seems that this 'sensible' character is acting as a mouth piece for Austen's and the reader's own viewpoint as he tells Emma the obvious, moral way of acting. In a sense he is her teacher of moral education, which is another theme of this nineteenth century novel.
Another point in the novel where Emma has a moment of self- realisation is when Mr. Elton's feelings become clear about who he prefers, Emma not Harriet, in Chapter XV, Volume I:
This surprising turn of events causes Emma to rethink her actions and behaviour and forces her to continue the journey of self- understanding.
In 'The Winter's Tale', Act 3, Scene 2 is a highly important scene as it is the play's tragic climax and turning point. Leontes feels that there is no recovery for his actions but only a path of misery and gloom represented by the winter's oppressive dark:
However there is still some hope it seems in the Oracle's message, which ends with:
There appears to be a glimmer of hope in the possibility of finding the heir. After Act 3, the play completely shifts mood, as sixteen years passes between this and the following Act to contrast the difference more emphatically. The winter becomes the spring. The change of season signals hope, as spring is a conventional image of youth and regeneration, supporting the idea that all is not lost. This splitting up of the play explains the term tragicomedy. In comparison, at the end of Chapter VII, Volume III, Emma feels she has reached her lowest point and reveals 'she never had been so depressed':'Time did not compose her. As she reflected more, she seemed but to feel it more'.
In both texts however this 'grief' and 'mortification' have to be felt on both characters' parts for the self-realisation and understanding to occur. The particular sections I have chosen from each piece of literature therefore are it appears the beginning of self-knowledge rather than a tragic end.
Chapter VII, Volume III is the most emotional and dramatic chapter concerning the feelings and thoughts of Emma the reader has yet seen. Due to the disapproval of Knightley, Emma actually sheds 'tears' at the end of the chapter. Austen uses direct narrative to portray Emma's true feelings and describes the situation through Emma's perspective. Even though the omniscient narrator uses third person, the reader feels closely related to Emma at this point in the novel as the language used is that of which one can imagine Emma using herself. The reader feels as though they are looking into Emma's mind and can immediately observe what her thoughts are. Due to the surprising misery Knightley's reprimand has on Emma, it is perhaps this specific point in the novel when Emma's feelings towards Knightley are made clear to the reader and even to herself. It is obvious how highly she regards Knightley's opinions and due to this idea, this chapter may mark the turning point and the beginning to the path of self- understanding and lead her to what she really desires.
In parallel, Leontes in Act 3, Scene 2, realises his awful mistakes and therefore can move forward from these. It is the almighty power of Apollo however that forces the King of Sicilia to realise his errors of judgement.
For both characters, Emma and Leontes, it takes an outside force to make them realise their mistakes.
In the chosen chapter in Austen's novel, the idea of social status is brought into the frame, as the difference between certain characters is illuminated, especially between Emma and Miss Bates. One critic, Adela Pinch, states that Emma 'learns of her potential to abuse her social position' There is a clear divide as Knightley points out:
The obvious class distinction between Miss Bates and Emma reveals to the reader that not all females of the time in which Jane Austen lived were privileged 'rich, handsome and clever' like our central character. Miss Bates, a single woman faces harsh realities, similarly does Jane Fairfax who is forced to work as a governess due to lack of money.
Likewise, one could argue that the idea of status and hierarchy are also a prominent feature of the trial scene in 'The Winter's Tale'. At the beginning of the scene King Leontes is all-powerful, individually constructing the consequences of the trial if his beliefs are made true:
But it soon prevails that Apollo, a higher power than even a King, has the control of the situation as Leontes' son drops down 'dead' due to the 'great profaneness' of the King.
Another similarity between the two different texts is the idea that misinterpretation, imagination and jealousy are linked and also act as separate themes in both pieces of literature. Leontes in Act 3, Scene 2 is described as 'a jealous tyrant' before admitting 'I have too much believed mine own suspicion'. Leontes is jealous of an adulterous relationship he believes his old friend Polixenes and his wife Hermione are having due to his misinterpretations. As early on in the play as Act 1, Scene 2 his seemingly unfounded jealousy is revealed, his over-imagination causing him to believe the adultery sincerely:
In the Box Hill scene, which I have chosen, Emma's imagination again leads to misunderstanding when she believes Frank Churchill could have feelings for Harriet:
This specific chapter is brimming with false readings such as Knightley's false reading of Emma and Frank Churchill's relationship and everyone's misunderstanding of Jane Fairfax and Frank Churchill's relationship. Austen uses irony in this key chapter as a device to emphasise this on-running theme. For example the statement made by Frank Churchill:
is heavily ironic because if Miss Woodhouse truly did know what everyone was thinking, there would be no room for misinterpretation and less harm caused.
A recurring motif in Emma is that of parties and social gatherings. The Box Hill episode is a prime example of this. Austen uses this idea as a representation of the society as a whole, a microcosm of society. The picnic is an intense way of looking at the interactions between characters.
This remark from Mrs Elton at the picnic reveals her attitude on a larger scale than just the controlling of events at the gathering on Box Hill. She believes herself to be of higher status than Emma and feels if anyone were in control of events it would be herself. In these social events, that 'save Highbury' from a life in 'moribund' Another point to note is the fact the reader is never taken outside of the village of Highbury. This enclosed feeling gives a strong impression of the limited nature of a woman's life in Jane Austen's era, early-nineteenth-century rural England.
It is difficult to draw conclusions in a general sense for the ways different genres organise their stories but with respect to these two specific texts and writers it is possible to observe a style. With the novel, the events slowly but continuously are described throughout the text and the story is gradually fed to the reader. There is not one standout section but an accumulation of ideas, themes and circumstances to lead to the conclusion of the novel. The recurrent motif of the social events provides a meaningful shape to the text as a whole to help express theme. The difference with the play is there is a highly explosive beginning,
The rest of the play unfolds from that. This is true for several of Shakespeare's other work such as 'The Tempest' and 'Othello'. Dialogue is the only means by which the audience can learn and the lack of narrator allows the reader to have an open unbiased judgement on events. Actions and words are the only source to the thoughts and feelings of the characters. Whereas with the novel, the author has more control by using a narrator and the reader can directly get inside the character's minds. Both genres are extremely effective at telling their story and their own use of different techniques and style add to the success of the narrative as a whole.