Leopold von Ranke (1795-1886), often acclaimed as the father of the scientific method of historiography, is compartmentalised by such a label. It will be argued that his methodology does not concur with that of Hans Scheier has argued that it was this legacy that distorted the definition of scientific history, whereby it became "a search for facts alone, with no laws or generalisations with a renunciation of all philosophy".
However, this does not grant his system a scientific outlook. Lord Acton may have argued that Ranke's 'colourlessness' in scrutinising evidence was scientific, but "whether Ranke himself was colourless...is questionable". Corresponding approximately to the Aristotelian emphasis on 'man in action' and the rejection of the universal applicability of historical laws, Ranke is merely a key thinker in the line of thought that dominated Europe since the 18
The main 'unscientific' problem in Ranke's system was his rejection of interpersonal analytical and intellectual differences. The historian must "accept only the complete certain", but are there any events- more so their conclusions- barring trivial ones that can escape the "posy and empty shadows" that have been cast over them by time? Even Ranke tried to emphasise this point by arguing that history "is not so much about gathering facts as to understand[ing] them". 'Understanding' the 'essence' of the facts is a concept that cannot be materialised without having to pass through human- and subjective human- agency. The historian, already constrained by an infinite number of facts and faced with the daunting prospect of selecting them without showing bias, is further curtailed by the absence of an overarching structure which would guide his research. In short, the demand of the structure and the supply of facts result in a situation not unlike that of the equilibrium in a market. It is an abstract possibility, but unattainable- hence unscientific. Thus, there are two fundamental problems in giving Ranke the aforementioned title- first, that his system was not scientific, and second, that he was not the first to construct such a system.
The interpretational problems in Ranke's model can be explained by comparing it to a simple mathematical or scientific formula. Let us consider-
This formula is universally applicable, no matter what the circumstances, because multiplying (a+b) with itself does indeed produce this outcome. Ranke's formula would look something like (f+u) = h, where Problems arise from the onset, as not only the collection of While it is scientific to put forward an inaccurate formula (say, a In mathematics, one side of the equation can be looked at to correct the formula (say, pointing out that a With Ranke, one cannot look at the In any case, There is, thus, no guarantee that both sides of the equation will, as they should, correspond with each other. Human subjectivity plays too great a role in a discipline such as history for it to be scientific.
The role of intuition also mars the Rankean claim to scientificity. There is no guarantee about developing laws of history in Ranke, as he argued that "from the particular, you can Ranke himself argued in Depending merely on a coincidence of intuitive concurrence in this case is not adequate for a complete understanding of people and their behavioural patterns that dot history.
Ranke's "deep roots in the religious world of the 18 Not only can we question such theologically grounded explanations of forces in world history, but it leads us back to the relativism inherent in the In his own works he makes assumptions based on these questionable conclusions that undermine his objectivity. For example, as editor of the Similarly, in his This would perhaps lend greater significance to some eras than others, and while perfectly acceptable by scientific standards, Ranke rejected this procedure by arguing that "every epoch is immediate to God".
In conjunction with what has already been said about the impossibility of a constant His idealism, reflected in his aspiration for an exhaustive study of source materials and their objective analysis, often came in conflict with the inherent conservatism that modelled his political outlook. While it could be argued that Ranke came to this conclusion on the basis of earlier research into the
Although Ranke argued for focussing on "the variety of experiences in history", his conclusions violated objectivity on two counts- first, the selective amount and nature of primary sources available to him (hence, not satisfying the exhaustive His main sources were governmental archive materials in Vienna, Venice, Florence and Rome which primarily contained official papers and documents produced by foreign emissaries. Similarly, his assertion that "India and China have a lengthy chronology", but at best a "natural history" is not based on sources studied that relate specifically to these civilisations, but on a Ironically, here Ranke departs in his conclusions from his own methodology.
This point can be linked to a critique of Ranke's rejection of the philosophical belief in progress in human society stemming from the Enlightenment. His assertion of the limitation of progress to Latin and Teutonic nations is based on the dearth of archival material from other countries, underlining his Eurocentrisim and undermining his apparent adherence to sources while writing history.
Finally, even if we concede Ranke's model and his writing to be scientific, he was by no means its first proponent. Epistemological questions were being mulled by European scholars since the Enlightenment which led to the Scientific, French and Industrial Revolutions, and many of their answers coincided with what Ranke himself prescribed to. Use of source materials has been widely used since Thucydides, insistence on primary sources were practiced during the 15 However, he "did not invent, but dramatised" the footnote, as its usage has been noted earlier.
The consequence of the Rankean legacy is that he was "blamed for what he wrote, the misuse of what he wrote, and for what he did not write at all". Ultimately, his was an attempt to "move from mythos to logos" when writing history, but as Peter Reil has argued, his spontaneity is distinct from the mechanistic notions one associates with sciences.