Fish contain especial structure myofibrillar protein and great water content. The aim of this study is to examine the changes in fish protein during storage. Determinate the protein contented in fish by using sensory assessment and chemical evaluation. TVN and TAM were used for describe the different forms protein in fish. For chemical determining them, the Kjeldahl digestion unit was employed, and several chemical reagents were used for distillation and titration. In this study, compared fresh fish with older fish, consequently, the outcomes have shown great different between them. Older fish should contain more TVN and TAM than do fresh fish. Furthermore, there should be significantly different between fresh and older fish in sensory evaluation.
Fish is inspected for the presence of parasites and diseases and also for quality assessment, a term which usually refers to the degree of spoilage (Konagaya S. and Konagaya T., 1979).
As fish spoils, various physical changes become apparent, for example the odour deteriorates, the surface becomes dull and the slime on it becomes opaque, the flesh softens, the eye pupil becomes turbid and a reddish coloration develops along the backbone (Coultate, 1996). The organoleptic scales have represented for assessing the skin, outer slime, eyes, gills, peritoneum and gill and internal odours of both fresh and older fish (Torry advisory note 91, MAFF, in handbook). In borderline cases, however, chemical determinations may be of considerable value.
According to handbook, as fresh fish ages, enzymes and bacteria break down the trimethylamine oxide (TMAO) to produce trimethylamine (TMA). For chemical determinations, fish spoils can be determined for the amounts of TAM and the total volatile nitrogen (TVN) content (Pearson, 1973), and fat hydrolysis due to the increase in the acid value of the fat represents. In this study, extractability is related to the solubility of the protein spoilage. The method of gently mixing homogenizer meat with solvent was used. Low pH and high temperature cause protein denaturation resulting in low solubility (Konagaya S. and Konagaya T., 1979). And the TVN formed was determined by using the Kjeldahl procedure and titration with sodium hydroxide. Differences of solubility of myofibrillar protein accord to the temperature and pH of the meat.
Fish is considered fresh if the TVN is&lt;20mg N/100g of fish. 30mg N/100g of fish is considered stale. Levels &gt;40mg N/100g of fish is unfit for consumption (Handbook).
In this study, a portion of sample was homogenized and added 300cm 3 of 5% trichloroacetic acid, then mixed well and stay some times. Trichloroacetic acid is one kind of quite powerful protein denaturising reagents. After homogenising, filter under vacuum into a Buchner flask. Transfer 5cm 3 of extract into a Kjeldahl digestion tube. Attach to the distillation unit; add alkali and steam distil into a flask containing 15cm 3 0.01 M hydrochloric acid. Collect 150cm 3 of distillate. Since here, the determination began.
Add 1cm 3 of indicator solution. This was deep orange solution, but few drops of this did change the colour of the solution little. Then as titrating, the pH value in solution was getting high, the colour would change into pink, and means the stop point of titration. It should be remember that, while titrated, kept shaking the flask, slowed down when got close to the final point and recorded the closing mark in case. In this practice, titrate to a faint pink end point with 0.01 M sodium hydroxide. Afterward, 2cm 3 16% neutral formaldehyde was added to the solution which resulting in acidifying the pH value in solution again for the later titration of TMA. Titrate for the liberated acid with 0.01 M sodium hydroxide until it went to faint pink again.
Meanwhile, a portion of fresh and older fish meat, respectively, were placed in the oven over night for determination of the percentage of water.
Whole fresh fish and older fish were used to determinate the proportion of protein comparatively. The raw meat from fresh fish and two weeks old fish were sampled. The method of the Kjeldahl digestion was employed. The electric balance was used to determine the weight of sample. We recorded the value to 0.001mg.
Equations used in calculating the TVN and the TMA are shown below:
In these equations, V 1 (ml) and V 2 (ml) are the titrimetric volumes of TVN and TMA, respectively. W (g) means the water content in fish samples.
For sensory assessment of fish quality, a scale refer to Torry Advisory was used. Assessed the fish by smiling, touching, and observing carefully. Then comparison with the description in the table, and marked it. At last, compared the results between fresh fish and older fish and make a conclusion.
Over view the practice, these methods for determining TVN and TAM in fish during different process spoilage were efficient and relatively accurate. When compared with the public values, most of results shown their agreement. Older fish had worse physical conditions and higher figures in TVN and TAM than had fresh fish. Although the contentions of TVN were considerablely higher than usually value which due to impurity of the reaction occurs during distillation.