A comparison of a diabetes- specific feed and a standard feed to increase glycemic control in hospitalised diabetic patients. A randomised controlled trial.
SID: 1425136
Diabetes is a chronic disease caused by either a deficiency in insulin production or the ineffectiveness of the insulin produced. This disease can be either inherited or acquired. (Zazzo, 2005) There are two principle forms of diabetes; type 1 and type 2 and both result in increased glucose concentrations in the blood which will lead to the damage of many body systems. Complications that are associated with diabetes include; retinopathy, nephropathy, heart disease, neuropathy and foot disease. The onset of all of these co- morbidities can be delayed with increased control of blood glucose, therefore, it is important for diabetic patients to be able to do so whilst in hospital. (Bak, Heardal. (1996) and Charney and Hertzler, 2004)
Prevalence of diabetic patients in hospitals has been reported to be approximately 20% and these patients are likely to require nutritional support whilst admitted. (Crespillo, Olveiraal. 2003) Enteral or tube- feeding is a method of providing nutritional support to patients who are unable to meet their nutritional requirements orally. (Fish and Seidner, 1999) However, standard nutritional formulas are high in carbohydrate and low in fat and fibre, and have been associated with increasing blood glucose due to rapid gastric emptying rate and rapid nutrient assimilation. Therefore, specific diabetic formulas have been developed to enable better blood glucose control. (Elia, Cerielloal. 2005)
Therefore, this research aims to evaluate the effectiveness of both a standard feed and a diabetes- specific feed to reduce blood glucose levels in diabetic patients. It aims to provide evidence that a diabetes-specific feed will significantly reduce blood glucose levels in diabetic patients when compared to a standard feed, therefore, reducing the risk of co- morbidities in these patients.
Short and long-term use of diabetes-specific formulas are associated with improved glucose control, and as mentioned previously, this may have implications for reducing complications of diabetes, for example, heart disease. (Elia, Cerielloal. 2005) Control of blood glucose can be difficult for diabetic patients on a day-to day basis, therefore, it is clear that controlling it whilst on a feed will produce difficulties. For instance, if blood glucose is inadequately controlled, hyperglycemia or glycosuria may result. (Leon-Sanz, Garcia-Lunaal. 2005) Therefore, it is necessary to closely monitor diabetic patients receiving a feed to include; metabolic, gastrointestinal and mechanical assessment. (Fish and Seidner, 1999) Common complications associated with diabetic patients on feeds are hyperglycemia or hypoglycaemia due to the feed being incompatible. (Barndregt and Soeters, 2005)
Numerous studies have compared standard and diabetes- specific formulas and have reported that the diabetes- specific feeds reduced post-prandrial rise in blood glucose. (Elia, Carielloal. (2005), Leon-Sanz, Garcia-Lunaal. (2005) and Crespillo, Olveiraal. (2003)) Many of these studies have compared a low carbohydrate feed to a high carbohydrate feed, as low carbohydrate feeds have been shown to reduce blood levels of glucose and requirements for insulin or other medication. (Leon-Sanz, Garcia-Lunaal. 2005) However, these trials have been conducted using small populations and short durations. Some of this research has tested a feed administered at breakfast only and not for patients requiring total tube feeding. (Elia, Cerielloal. 2005) Also, some research has focused on the palatability of oral drinks designed for diabetic patients which is not helpful when considering tube feeding. (Grau, Almazon Arjonaal. 2004) Therefore, it is necessary to conduct research that will compare a standard feed to a diabetes- specific feed for diabetic patients requiring total nutritional support.
Diabetes has been described as a disease with social and economic impact, which is likely to increase along with the rise in diagnosis. (Crespillo, Olveiraal. 2003) In the UK costs associated with the major complications that arise from diabetes range from 872-8458 per patient. Patients with diabetes are also more likely to be admitted to hospital and it has been recorded that they account for up to 25% of intensive care admissions and, therefore, may need nutritional support. (Elia, Cerielloal. 2005) It has also been noted that diabetic patients are at an increased risk of dying whilst in hospital along with longer hospital stays which will further increase costs of treatment. (Crespillo, Olveiraal. 2003)
Therefore, if this research can provide evidence that diabetes-specific nutritional formulas can increase gylcemic control in diabetic patients, and, reduce the onset of further complications it will benefit both the patients' quality of life and reduce the cost to the NHS.
This trial will be analysed on an intention-to-treat basis, where participants will be assessed within the group they were originally randomised too, regardless of whether they complete the trial. Baseline quantitative variables will be compared between the groups to test homogeneity using Students t test or Mann- Whitney U test depending on whether the variable is normally distributed or not. The adverse effects responses will be tabulated and analysed using Fishers exact test. Blood glucose levels are not normally distributed, therefore, will need to be logged and then analysed using an unrelated t test. A 95% confidence interval will be calculated for all comparisons and statistical significance will be p = 0.05.