The most lasting legacy of Edward Said's After providing a glimpse of the major facets of Orientalism, and the responses it generated, this paper will argue that understandings and discussions of the East- focussing here particularly on India- continue to be influenced by the fundamental feature of Orientalism. The articulation of that feature is credited to Ronald Inden, who argued that Orientalism's deepest influence was denying "human agency" to the East, and providing universalising "models of how people ought to or must act." Explicitly or inadvertently, both Orientalists as well as postcolonial critiques of all ideological spectres have failed to counter this highest level of hegemony.
In many ways, the 'classical' Orientalism of the 19 Firstly, Richard King has identified a broad distinguishing discourse, whereby society, science, rationality and masculinity are solely attributed to the Enlightenment. Conversely, religiosity, irrationality, mysticism and femininity are considered exclusive characteristics of the Orient. No sovereign arose endowed with commanding abilities and capable of wielding together the jarring members of the body politic." While colonial and postcolonial nationalist historiography has responded by referring to the 'golden age' of the Maurya and Gupta empires, the crucial question of whether a centralised Westphalian state is the minimum requirement to prevent colonisation has been largely unexplored. Herein lies the continual hold of Orientalist knowledge that Said wrote of.
Said's work sparked off defensive reactions across academic disciplines to what was considered "Western tradition", and rebuttals by contemporary Orientalists like Dennis Porter and Bernard Lewis. However, the problem- as Gyan Prakash has pointed out- remains in what is taken to be the representation of the West, and invariably this is determined by Orientalism in the first place. Such reverse essentialism was considered a part of Said's Moreover, such discourses often deny the autonomy of the historical actors themselves. In While some contemporary writers sought justification of the tradition from Hindu texts, Orientalists denounced it as an example of 'Oriental despotism' and took it upon themselves to "civilise" the natives. What goes unnoticed in the debate- as Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak has argued- is the "silencing of the subaltern woman", whose history is presented by two contesting frameworks detached from her own agency.
To fill the void generated by Orientalist and nationalist historiography, a group of historians came together in the 1980s to establish The founding editor- Ranajit Guha- argued that their aim was to write the histories of the "demographic difference" between the total population of India and those groups they considered to be 'elite'. More fundamentally, the group- Partha Chatterjee in particular- has focussed on the "marginalisation of the 'other' forms of knowledge".
This approach, however, often fails to break the 'self-other' dichotomy between the elites and the marginalised groups, besides falling into the familiar trap of essentialising the supposedly non-essentialising characteristics- "appropriation of subalternity", according to Chatterjee- of these groups. Finally, as recent work in psychology has shown, individual actions are often subconsciously 'automated' by their external environment. This reverts back to the problem many critics feel is inherent in
Said, in Nationalist and Marxist critiques of Orientalism failed to break out of Eurocentric discourses. Nationalism staked a claim to "reason and progress instituted Such transitions emphasise Europe's position Citing the example of jute worker movements in Bengal, he argues that class based analysis (Marxist) or the absence of a "liberty tree" (E P Thompson) is grossly inadequate, given the importance of caste and religion. Traditional Marxist responses would assert that the Indian workers 'weren't
Broadly speaking, Orientalism has created two discourses- the 'self-other' discourse which underlines the essential differences between Europe and the Orient, and the response that it has provoked from writers aiming to It is curious to note that both- while supposedly opposed discourses- accept the universality of Europe's values and ideas. Peter Heehs thus considers the responses to Orientalism as mere components of the homogenising discourse. He has classified postcolonial writings into critical (1950s and 60s), reductive (1970s and 80s) and reactionary (1990s) approaches. Reactionary writing has been the most vociferous (especially in the 1990s with the ascent of the Hindutva movement) in arguing for "re-Indianising" the discourse to trace the "imagined community" of India, but it not only borrows crucial aspects of colonial Orientalism (such as the idea of a united and centralised India), but continuously finds- as Sudipta Kaviraj has argued- an 'other' to the Indian 'self' (Muslims, Europeans, etc.).
An example of an academic debate ought to illustrate the point. Writing from a traditional Eurocentric perspective, David Landes has argued that Europe for the past millennia has possessed conducive socio-political-economic institutions, coupled with a temperate climate, entrepreneurial zeal and a lack of Malthusian pressure on resources, which made it the natural birthplace of the Industrial Revolution in the 19 Crucially, he acknowledges the existence of a linear notion of progress, from which Asia- for whatever reasons- digressed. This is a classic case of non-European histories being reduced to mere 'accessories' of the meta narrative that is Europe's history, as Chakrabarty's earlier argument goes.
The problem in Oriental historiography- as Ronald Inden argues- is with the rather inflexible usage of universalised terms such as free market, liberalism, democracy, welfare state, etc. I would even argue that narratives of non-European societies through a Western framework (without tacit acknowledgement of its thus limitation) "presents itself as a form of knowledge that is both different from, and superior to" the Orientals' knowledge about themselves- in essence, an Orientalist discourse. O'Hanlon and Washbrook question postcolonial critiques how the Oriental can refute Western discourses without understanding them, and how he can understand them without engaging them, and how, therefore, can he avoid being drawn into the discourse and avoid "totalising abstraction" and "endless relativism" of postmodernism at the same time. Perhaps what is required is a discourse not impacted upon by Western systems of knowledge- in essence, studying the Orient For example, Indian political philosophy, despite being extremely rich, has been prevented from analysing Indian history on the grounds of "being tainted with theological assumptions".
Whether one looks at "the clash of civilisations" or the "axis of evil", essentialisations about the Orient are rife in contemporary Western- and consequently global- discourses. These not only reinforce the traditional Orientalist definitions of the 'self' (the West), it prompts the Orient to defend its own 'self' as defined by its 'other' (the West), thereby indirectly accepting the initial generalisation. Postcolonial Oriental historiography- in this case Indian- has failed to live up to Said's "fundamental human and intellectual obligation"- to reconcile a humanist method of writing history with the ideas of a Foucauldian discourse. Consequently, writings about the East continue to bear- with varying degrees and often implicitly- the characteristics of the Orientalism of the 19 The ghost of James Mill's