The notion of teachers creating their own approach to teaching (Brown, 2000) has grown out of a century's SLA teaching tradition. Despite criticism of lack of clarity, it is now widely used by teachers. This paper highlights the justification for such an approach by first looking at its validation and rationale, and then focusing on how this can be implemented. The approach of 'principled eclecticism' is looked at from within a specific context, focusing on conditions necessary for learning that can be enhanced by the teacher in any situation. The final section concludes that variety and balance within a teacher's approach are necessary and offers a recommendation for activity types.
Teachers today are in a wonderful position. We have at our disposal a rich history of language and language learning theories that have informed a great variety of methods. One possible drawback to so much variety is that there is little consistency in teachers' approaches and a doubt in teachers' ability when left to choose their own approach to language teaching. However, in my view, this variety is a positive factor in ELT and can inform our teaching to the benefit of more learners. By drawing on current literature and my experience as a teacher and student, the pros, cons and implications of an eclectic approach are examined.
Richards and Rodgers (2001) suggest that previous approaches: 'draw on a large amount of collective experience and practice from which much can be learned'. Rather than disregard years of language teaching, teachers can benefit by using what is useful in their specific situation. I suggest that teachers being able to tailor their classes to fit the learners, compensates for any inconsistency in approches. Using an eclectic approach means any lesson or activity within a lesson can be tuned to match the learners' individual needs to be challenged or supported. To ensure the continued development in this approach, in addition to reflective dialogue, discussion groups could be a regular part of staff meetings. In such a setting, novice teachers stand to benefit from the expertise of experienced teachers.
Finding the balance between challenge and support, between focus on form and fluency, and between field dependent or independent learners is no easy task. It requires listening to the students, sensitivity, experience, and knowledge of human behaviour and theories of language learning. But teachers want to work and plan efficiently and must be able to rely on published material as well. A book I believe to be extremely effective in dealing with many aspects of language learning simultaneously is 'Grammar Dictation' (Wajnryb, 1990). The activity proposed, 'Dictogloss', provides opportunities for listening, speaking and writing, within which there is negotiation of meaning and focus on form. It includes roughly tuned input with opportunities for new lexis and can be learner-centred with students choosing the topic. This type of activity, focusing on contextualised form that 'necessitates reflection and decision-making' (Hedge, 2000) fulfils many goals and requirements simultaneooulsy.
The implications are that within a balanced approach, the more balanced or inclusive any activity or process, the better. We need to be realistic, using and adapting coursebooks and giving students as much variety as possible. The more all-encompassing a teacher's use of materials and ideas, the more likely they are to achieve successful outcomes.