This paper presents an analysis of two texts which have been chosen as interesting from a pedagogical view. The present IELTS exam requires that candidates write either a formal or an informal letter. By comparing and analysing the texts it should be possible to identify a prototypical letter and how choices realised in the texts achieve their goals. As Eggins (2004) states, this kind of contrastive analysis is useful because patterns of choice are more easily identified.
Genre and Register theory can enable the linguist to both predict and deduce the likely meanings and linguistic features which are 'at risk' in a text. Genres are realised through structural patterns, or stages whereas the different contexts manifest in the variables of Register. This paper will therefore analyse the texts' schematic structure to highlight how closely they conform to the genre and use Register theory to focus on how the writers convey underlying meaning. Finally the texts are analysed from a pragmatic viewpoint to see to what extent maxims of politeness are followed. The paper concludes with the implications for teaching exam students.
If we can determine what the social or communicative purpose of a text is, we should also be able to identify its genre. (Martin 2001; Eggins and Martin 1997 pp236-237; Eggins, 2004; Bhatia, 1993). The social purpose of text B is interactional - a term normally used to refer to spoken discourse to describe the maintaining of social relations. Text A on the other hand is transactional, the purpose is to inform and request someone to do something. Although Swales (1990) refers to the overarching category of 'letters' as a 'multigeneric generalisation', when the purpose is identifiable they can be viewed as a specific genre. Thus from a top-down approach we can say that both texts belong to a multigeneric form of It seems likely that the first genre 'a' occurs more commonly in formal letters as in text A, whilst in text B a rejection of a friendship must logically be informal. Paltridge categorises formal and personal letters as two genres, interestingly, he cites research as showing that the same genre can differ greatly in its linguistic patterns' and vice versa. (Biber cited in Paltridge, 1996. p237-239)
Fairclough (2003) suggests that social transformations change genres and that this change is manifested as a difference in the combination of genres. One social change of the last 50 or so years has been the advent of computer technology use within organisations. Formerly, correspondence or communication was generally a one to one interaction between business and client; today much of the administration and logging of correspondence is often complicated by elaborate networks. From email to outsourced customer services, the potential for lost communications is much greater thus possibly giving rise to a new genre, of which text A is an example. This genre (which inevitably forms a An example of the
whereas such a chain is not likely for text B.
One reason the two texts are identifiable is that they conform to the schematic structure of their genre, although more so in certain stages than others. Painter (2001) states that: "the purpose of a genre determines its shape (...) Thus the structure is not so much an arbitrary prescriptive formula as a facilitating convention." Genres are facilitating because in using and recognising the genre (or the purpose) the reader is freed from the burden of repeatedly creating and understanding new patterns of layout, stages and language (Eggins, 2004). This conformity to a generic type allows us to predict features. In any correspondence one would expect to see a specific layout and functional stages such as Opening, Closing. Furthermore in complaint letters one would expect such stages including:
Situating (including background information), Statement of Problem possibly embedded in reason for correspondence, optional Further Explanation of the problem and/or the background information and optional Request.
It seems that the first two stages could come in either order though Situating is likely to be first, unless the problem is embedded in the reason for writing.
At this point the stages diverge significantly warranting different analyses.
As personal letters are informal with parallels to conversation, the register is more "open" (Hasan, 1996 cited in Mortensen, 2005) thus allowing for more diversity in structure and semantic realisations. Text A should likewise be more constrained in these aspects.
The interpersonal resources will reveal the nature of the relationships between writer and reader, and the attitudes of the writer towards the topic and themselves. In encoding the relationship this metafunction will direct the reader in According to SFL this is an example of how the text is both product and producer of the context. I suggest it is within the
As well as looking at language in relation to context and background, pragmatics gives importance to social principles, examining the way social distance directs behaviour in language. Analysing the texts from a pragmatic viewpoint, allows us to see how the distance between speakers affects their linguistic choices as both texts contain face threatening acts (FTA).
The notion of 'Face', proposed as universal by Brown and Levinson, "must be constantly attended to" by participants; it can be "lost, maintained, or enhanced". Negative face is: "the want of every 'competent adult member' that his actions be unimpeded by others;" (ibid, 1987). Positive face describes the need to be liked, to feel part of a group and to have one's desires shared.
Maxims of cooperation (Grice, 1975) are usually associated with The text writer is aware of the reader and the impact that his/her text could have and therefore would rationally observe the principles of Grice's maxims (Cameron, 2001). The maxims can be summed up as follows:
The analyses reveal to what degree these authentic texts conform to their genre type in both structure and formality. Additionally, we see how the flouting of conversational maxims, use of politeness strategies and lexico-grammatical choices achieve the writer's purpose and reflect their attitudes. With regard to exam students we need to consider which of these aspects it is useful for them to be aware of and to what degree. The answer depends on the exam tasks.
Typical tasks specify what information the candidate should include but not the degree of formality:
It is interesting to note the degree of similarity there is to the genre analysis. Evidently a student does not need to know the layout conventions or openings. Although much of the structural organization has been given, some awareness of and practice in the schema structure including closings would be very useful. As there is such a close correspondence of both structure and content (complaint), it would be interesting and useful for students to analyse authentic letters (Burns, 1990). Using discovery techniques and instruction, formulaic phrases could be highlighted. Such as those above for politeness strategies (I'm afraid) or introducing topics, ('I'm writing about..')
Both formal and informal letters could be used to help students identify aspects of register and predict the register used from the given context. However, taking the analysed texts as examples of different registers, we see that there is no clear divide of formality. Therefore students need to be aware of the The more awareness they have in this the better; as Painter says (2001), the tenor dimension is extremely difficult for students to 'navigate'.
Despite claims that textbook material is inadequate and does not reflect real language (Badovi-Harlig et al.), in this case it seems that because the exam task is realistic, so is the exam teaching material. Any backwash created by the exam could have useful applications in the real world. To sum up, an analysis such as this is a constructive pedagogic tool to sensitise educators; however it is doubtful that students need to be aware of, for example, FTA's. From insights gained, a teacher should therefore be mindful of what