The present study sought to determine the chemical values of various fish and meat products, as well as evaluating some methods of analysis. It was concluded that the methods are generally reliable in determining protein, lipid, water and mineral values in fish and meat. However, it is evident that great care must be taken in the execution of such food analyses.
Food products are analysed for a variety of reasons, e.g., compliance with legal and labelling requirements, assessment of product quality, determination of nutritional value, detection of adulteration, and research and development. The analyses of the present study sought to establish the contents of proteins, lipids, water, minerals and carbohydrates in a variety of fish and meat products. The following terms are central in these food analyses:
The methods used in this analysis are the Kjeldahl procedure, for determining protein content; the Soxhlet procedure, for determining lipid content; and the mineral and water content are determined gravimetrically. For a presentation of the materials used, and details of the procedures, please see the U16503 Food Science module handbook pp. 7-11. To detect variances in lipids extracted by different solvents; chloroform &amp; methanol, and petroleum spirit were used for the lipid determination.
The calculations used in these procedures are as follows:
For protein determination:
The nitrogen level found by this calculation is then multiplied by 6.25 to get the protein % of the food sample.
For lipid determination:
For moisture determination:
For mineral determination:
For carbohydrate determination:
To give an example, the values for white fish (coley) before and after extraction were found to be as shown in Table 2. Table 3 provides the values for protein determination.
The results of this study are shown in Table 4. When compared with the commonly reported chemical values of published reports, there are some clear discrepancies. The analyses of the fish samples have primarily found values in the range of the expected values. Except for the mineral values, which are slightly lower in the present analysis: 0.93 % for white fish, and 2.4 % for smoked oily fish, compared with published values of 1-2 % and 3.6 % respectively.
The meat product values are quite dissimilar to those of the published findings. The discrepancies are especially evident in the sausage values for lipids and carbohydrate; the lipid, water and carbohydrate values for minced beef; and the lipid, water, mineral and carbohydrate values of unsmoked bacon. There are no obvious systematic variances.
The values reported in the results section show that there are some discrepancies in the chemical values found in this study compared with those values previously reported. The discrepancies are especially evident in the meat products. There are several possible explanations for this. One might be that these are processed meat products. The chemical aspects vary according to the processing methods of meat, and different brands may differ in production methods. The area of the animal the meat is taken from also has different chemical values. Other factors affecting the nutritional values of processed meats may be additives, the age and physical state of the animal, feeding of the animal, and the country and place of origin. Methods of extraction in the laboratory may also vary. Food for analysis should resemble the sold product as closely as possible, and the product should not be left unpackaged for long periods of time before the analysis commences. These are areas where there might be variations in method, as well as in how the procedure is carried out (although following the correct guidelines, equal analyses should principally correspond with each other). As was discussed in the introduction, there are also variances within the methods of analyses. Aspects such as application of different solvents, and which methods are appropriate for specific food samples should be considered.
Another problem with the present study concerns the lipid values of the white fish. The combined weight of the dish and sample after extraction (c&amp;m: 39.7237g, p.s.: 55.1884g) is less than that of the empty dish (39.7724g and 55.2072g), resulting in negative lipid values of -0.5963g and -0.0261g respectively. It is evident that something has gone wrong in the analysis. However, it is not exactly clear what that is. One possible explanation is that the lipid content of white fish is so small, that the negative values are a result of measurement inaccuracies. Another possible explanation might be that the flasks used for the extraction may not have been completely dry, thus adding the weight of residual water to the weight of the empty flask.
The analyses carried out in this study demonstrate that there may be variances between and within methods of chemical value determination. The production of certain meats may also affect the nutritional values of the end product.
An important discovery of this study is the importance of precise technique and measurement in analysing chemical values of food samples.