Friedrich Nietzsche (1844-1900), like Marx, Freud and Feuerbach is one of the 'masters of suspicion,' who rejects any type of supernatural interpretation of religion. His critique of religion and his appeal to energy over reason and passion over rationality influenced many thinkers of the day. Like Freud, Nietzsche wanted to challenge the idea that we can understand humans through reason. His main view was that religion was born out of resentment and so was essentially a "false" or constructed religion. I will explore how far Nietzsche's view can be verified.
Nietzsche also suffered from bad health and had to eventually retire after a mental collapse. It is interesting to see how his ill health may have affected his work and ideas. 'As Nietzsche himself became ever more ill, so his interest in questions of health and sickness became ever more obsessive.'
We can see this in Nietzsche's concept of humans being 'sick animals.' Nietzsche argued that technically, we are animals in our ability to eat and reproduce. However, our ability to think makes us uneasy and so it becomes a sickness.
Nietzsche goes on to explain that man has two sides to him. The side which allows us to think and reason, and the side which is passionate and brutal. Therefore, we are uncomfortable with our animality because we have these two sides to deal with. This idea is connected to Freud's tripartite account of the self, where he argues that humans are in conflict with themselves. Humans are essentially animals torn between their unconscious desires and their rational, conscious self. Nietzsche argues that this is linked to religion in that religion responds to this division of the self. He argues that 'every religion is born out of fear and need. . .'
Nietzsche is best known for his concept of the Death of God. Nietzsche and Feuerbach agree that God reflects human values. Humans have created God, projecting all the admirable qualities they would like to encompass themselves. In short, God is a projection of human values. Feuerbach states that:
However, there are differences between the thinkers. Feuerbach does not question the values concerning God, and argues that humans should take these values back into their own lives. Nietzsche, however, is more critical and wants to challenge these values and the implications of atheism. He believes that atheists are lazy and na He challenges this view with the example of the Madman:
Nietzsche argues that values and morals must be created anew after we have removed God. The death of God "represents the (self)annihilation of this oppressive transcendent God." Why, then, Nietzsche asks, should we still live in the same way if we have removed this transcendence?
Nietzsche emphasises the power atheists have in removing God. There is optimism and opportunities. Nietzsche's quote 'the sea, our sea again lies open before us,' Humans are left with uncertainty, unsure of where they are or where they are going. The death of God will lead to the rejection of values and universal moral laws, which will eventually lead to nihilism. Nietzsche wants to look beyond the Christian values. Nietzsche finds this nihilism liberating, while other thinkers, such as Martin Heidegger thought it to be part of the problem. The death of God isn't liberating as it leaves us in a world in flux.
Although his views are anti-Christian, Nietzsche was not necessarily anti-religious. Nietzsche believed himself to be the follower of the Greek God Dionysus and he is referred to in many of his works, particularly in
Fraser looks at why Nietzsche adopts the figure of Dionysus in his works:
Nietzsche's need for passion and irrationality is apparent in the character of Dionysus. The Christian God in comparison, idolises weakness. Christianity is also concerned with equality, which Nietzsche disagrees with as he believes that there is no real equality in the world. Therefore, he is in favour of some religions, such as Islam which in his opinion, is against equality. In
With the death of God comes the death of ideas and preconceptions about good and evil. Our understanding of good and evil is grounded in Christianity. Nietzsche believed that Christianity had been constructed by the apostle Paul, to exploit the Roman masters. Fraser states that 'the architect . . .indeed the founder of Christianity itself was Paul." He described Christianity as being a form of slave morality. It favours the vulnerable and glorifies weakness. He states that Christianity has 'taken the part of the weak, the low, the botched." Nietzsche believes that this has arisen from the Jewish religion where the slaves invert social morals over their masters:
Nietzsche uses the example of the Christian value of 'turning the other cheek.' This, Nietzsche believes is turning a weakness into a virtue. Because of this, Nietzsche believes that one cannot be a true Christian and adopt Christian values as essentially, it will be a 'dishonest mode of life." Christianity was born from resentment and it is a destructive form of religion, rather than a creative movement. For Nietzsche, morality should be the concern of the strong. He favoured the Aristotelian values of the ancient Greek Gods, who believed in brute strength and intelligence.
There are similarities here with Freud, who also believed that Christianity uses the construct of guilt to control and exploit. By making the powerful feel that they are sinful makes them weak and they will in turn feel guilty about being strong. Freud believes this guilt is grounded in an original act of patricide and bases his idea on the Darwinian concept of the primal horde, where the sons murdered the father to have access to the women. They are overcome with guilt and eventually create a shrine for the dead father. This, Freud argues, is how the relationship between man and God developed. Freud and Nietzsche both believed that 'the content of religion was itself twisted, warped, unhealthy.'
However, although Nietzsche disagreed with the concept of Christianity and discarded it as a 'false' religion, he pays much attention to the figure of Jesus and claims that thinkers of the day only looked to the construction of Christ as opposed to the man Jesus. Nietzsche claimed, 'there was only one Christian and he died on the cross.'
Nietzsche created the concept of the This concept comes at a time that is rife with new ideas, such as the Darwinian theory of Evolution. The This 'master-morality' that Nietzsche wanted to reinstate would be based around the
The As well as this transmutation of values, the Everything, Nietzsche claimed, is done out of self-interest.
Some have taken the view that Nietzsche's Fraser suggests that Nietzsche has taken the history of Christianity and twisted it 'into a new shape." Similarities are made between the Fraser suggests that the concept of the superman is similar to the Christian concept of redemption, where one is expected to liberate oneself in order to emerge anew.
Alasdair Macintyre also criticised the Macintyre believes that the 'The Macintyre went on to explain that Nietzsche cannot truly criticise religion when he is writing in the Christian tradition himself and therefore is effected by Christian morals and values.
Nietzsche also preached about the 'Will to Power' or the 'Will to Life.' He used the example of Schopenhauer's pessimistic character Silenus from 'Oedipus at Colonus' who believed that it is best to 'die soon.' Nietzsche disagreed with the idea of giving up the will to life. Instead, Nietzsche believed in the affirmation of life and the 'Eternal Recurrence.' Nietzsche believed that the motivation behind the will to life was our human instinct and desire to live and be creative. Fraser claims, this affirmation of life is 'closer to the language of love rather than the language of power,'
Nietzsche believed in loving your destiny, in affirming love and life. The eternal recurrence creates the image of living in a time that has no meaning or purpose. To live in a world with no real meaning, where creation is not explained or justified, surely opposes human's capabilities.
Nietzsche is often described as being the forefather of post-modernity. He was against conformity and famously quoted, 'we have to rid ourselves with the bad taste of wanting to agree with many other." His views on Christianity and morality have influenced many thinkers, such as Jacques Derrida, Jean Paul Sartre and Luce Irigaray.
However, are Nietzsche's views plausible? Following his ill health, it is known that his sister Elizabeth was in charge of his works and so the interpretations of his writings can be problematic. Is what we read today the work of the real Nietzsche? There is an ongoing debate about Nietzsche's work being sympathetic to Nazi values and beliefs, which again can invoke uncertainty when exploring Nietzsche's work. Like Feuerbach, has Nietzsche committed the genetic fallacy? Nietzsche has no solid proof that Christianity was born out of resentment and even if it had arisen in such a way, this does not prove the non-existence of a transcendent God. Many also argue that his views on Christianity and his creation of the Fraser quotes, '. . .(the