Many may ask, what does language have to do with philosophy? There are, however, many philosophical questions concerning language. What exactly do words mean? How is language related to the world? Many philosophers have attempted to answer these questions by positing theories about meaning and language. I will attempt to explore these theories and will conclude if any of them hold water.
There are several uses of 'meaning.' There is meaning as intention, e.g., 'I didn't mean to hurt you,' meaning as importance, e.g., 'You mean a lot to me.' There is also a difference between linguistic meaning and speaker meaning. Linguistic meaning is what the language means itself. For example, the French sentence 'Il pleut,' means 'it is raining.' Speaker meaning is what the speaker intends to mean. So if John says, 'Il pleut,' he means 'it is raining.'
Frege was particularly interested in the theory of mediated reference. The reference in a sentence is the thing or person and the sense is the meaning or what the object is presented as.
Frege says that sometimes, the nominata or reference of an expression may be the same, but the sense may be different. 'The nominata of "morning star" and "evening star" are the same but not their senses." Proper names, such as 'Bob,' have a reference but no sense.
A.J.Ayer, a logical positivist, believed that metaphysical or religious statements were nonsense. He believed in using reason and scientific explanations. Logical tautologies and observations from experience was paramount in understanding language and the world. The principle of verificationism is founded on the belief that a sentence has meaning if it can be verified.
A logical tautology is something that is true by definition or analytic. For example, the sentence 'all brothers are male,' is meaningful as it is analytically verifiable. Ayer differentiates between a strong and weak understanding of 'verifiable.'
The strong sense, therefore, is verificationism which is dependent on observation and experience, while the weak is through probable hypotheses.
There are however, flaws in the principle of verificationism. If we take the proposition, 'there is at least one black crow,' we would verify this proposition by finding a black crow. If, however, we have the proposition, 'all crows are black,' we would have to observe all crows and this would be impossible to verify. This would appeal to weak verificationism as it would be highly probable. But it would be a problem for strong verificationists. The principle of verificationism itself cannot be verified. Also, we cannot verify something unless we know what it means.
With some propositions that cannot be verified, they can often be falsified. Karl Popper is best associated with the principle of falsifiability. For a proposition to be false, it must, through observation show that it is false. Therefore, the claim 'all crows are black' can be falsified by finding a white crow. Popper stated that theories which were not falsifiable were simply unscientific. For example, ideology and psychoanalytic theories were not necessarily meaningless, just unscientific. The same problem appears, however, where some claims can be falsified, such as 'all crows are black' but others, such as 'not all crows are black,' cannot be falsified, but can be verified.
H.P.Grice distinguished between two types of meaning. Natural meaning is meaning as indication, such as 'the bad weather means we shall have to stay inside.' Grice stated that 'x meant that p and x means that p entail p." That is to say that you cannot say 'the bad weather means we shall have to stay inside but we shan't.'
Non-natural meaning is meaning that is normally derived from language and with non-natural claims, he states that 'x means that p and x meant that p do not entail p." This is to say that if we take one of Grice's claims, 'those three rings on the bell of the bus means that the bus is full,' we can actually go on to say that 'the conductor actually made a mistake - the bus is not full." In short, you can argue with non-natural claims. Grice uses the abbreviation meansNN when speaking about non-natural meaning.
Grice is predominantly concerned with non-natural meaning and he believed that the meaning of an utterance is in the mind of the speaker and is dependent on the speaker's intention.
Therefore, intention is what distinguishes a meaningful act from a meaningless one. If an act produces a meaning, it must have an intention or a reason. Unintentional acts are meaningless. However, there are some uncertainties with Grice's theory.
This, therefore raises a problem. One may want to induce a belief without wanting anyone to know that they are trying to induce a belief. 'This isn't a case of communication, it's a case of manipulation." Grice tackles this problem by stating that:
Grice goes on to distinguish between two different types of non-natural meaning. Speaker meaning is what an individual means on a specific occasion. For example, 'when John says "Il pleut" he means "it is raining."' Expression meaning is an utterance which is timeless in that linguistic community. For example, 'the French sentence "Il pleut" means "it is raining."'
Grice believed that speaker meaning is more fundamental than that of expression meaning. Expression meaning is normally derived from speaker meaning. Speaker meaning, therefore can help us understand expression meaning.
There are several objections to Grice's theory of meaning. Grice bases his theory on the hope that everyone will have complicated intentions:
Some people are not always conscious of their intentions. Is Grice putting too big a strain on intentions? Grice also disregards the fact that many people, particularly academics and scientists, coin words everyday. Therefore, we can to some extent use words to mean anything we want.
In the example of Humpty Dumpty in Lewis Carrol's Through the Looking Glass, the idea of language and utterances being under our own control is conveyed. In the book, Humpty uses words in any way he wishes.
The idea behind Humpty's thesis is that we can all control how we utter words or phrases; we can do what we want with language. However, surely this will create problems when trying to communicate in language.
This shows that Humpty cannot be understood and communication is practically impossible. Therefore, he cannot ignore expression meaning.
The stance that Grice takes is that all meaning is psychological and it lies in the mind. However, surely there can be other sources of meaning. Linguistic externalism considers the concept of meaning outside of the mind. Hilary Putnam argued against linguistic internalism and claimed that what our words refer to does not depend on our psychological state.
Putnam looks at the extension and intension of a word or utterance. Extension is the thing that a word actually refers to. For instance, the extension of water is the liquid. The intension is almost like a list of characteristics. For example, water is something that can freeze, it can fall from the sky etc
Some words have an intension but no extension. For example the 'Tooth Fairy.' To know what this means is to know its intension. We may try to describe what its extension might be. For instance, it may have long blonde hair, she might fly etc. Therefore, extension is a type of descriptivism.
Putnam tackles the question, 'are meanings in the head?' with his Twin Earth Thought experiment. He imagines that there is a planet called Twin Earth, which is identical to earth, However, the chemical structure of water on Twin Earth is more complex. Rather than H2O, it is XYZ.
What Putnam is trying to portray is that a word can be used differently on each planet, even though the mental state and intentions of the inhabitants of each planet are the same. Therefore, there is more to meaning than intention and mental states.
What the Twin Earth theory is supposed to show, is that our intentional states are dependent on the environment in a more fundamental way. Tim Crane objected to Putnam's Twin Earth theory. Crane argues that many chemicals such as chlorine have two kinds of isotopes, but when we refer to chlorine, we are not just referring to one kind. Why can't the same be done for water? Perhaps, then, Putnam does not see water as a natural kind term.
Indexical terms are known to fix references and Putnam treats natural kind terms, such as water as indexical terms. It is, therefore, a 'rigid designator." Crane finds this problematic:
Crane concludes that Putnam cannot show us much about intentional states.
All three accounts of meaning have their strengths and weaknesses. Grice's concept of meaning and intention is plausible if one wants to disregard the importance of non-cognitive factors. The same problem arises with Putnam's theory of linguistic externalism. In my opinion, I find the theory of verificationism to be the most plausible. The concept of using empiricism and logic dates all the way back to Hume, who also believed in analytic and verifiable observations.
Although one may object to verificationism with the argument that only some claims can be verified while others can only be falsified ('there are no white crows'), the objection will only work if we take a strong reading of verification. We cannot disregard weak verificationism. Although some may argue that the theory only refers to descriptive language or material things, logical positivists such as Ayer address meaning in a restricted sense.
The same objections are also made about the theory of falsifiability. However, it will never discount words or utterances as meaningless, but rather simply unscientific. This is a much more flexible account of meaning.