Tourism can be thought of as a rather complicated activity that overlaps various different sectors of the society and economy. Without planning, it may generate several unwanted and unexpected impacts (World Tourism Organization, 1994). Therefore tourism should be developed and managed in a controlled and sustainable way, based on sound planning. Moreover, it should be integrated within the wide planning process in order to promote certain goals of economic, social and environmental enhancement which may be accomplished through appropriate tourism development (Hall, 2000).
This coursework will provide a critical analysis of what a tourism plan/ planning is and what are the benefits of its implementation. It will evaluate the planning process, the elements that should be included within a tourism plan and the methods of implementation. Furthermore, it will set out the implications of adopting a tourism plan for a specific destination.
The selected area for the purpose of this coursework is Kranjska Gora in Slovenia, which at the time of writing does not have an existing tourism plan. Kranjska Gora is situated in the area of the Zgornjesavska valley, located at the north west of Slovenia between the Karavanke Mountains and the Julian Alps. Kranjska Gora is a year-round mountain tourist resort as well as an important winter sports resort with a variety of skiing slopes available. The size of the municipality of Kranjska Gora is 256,3 km (Municipality of Kranjska Gora, undated; Kranjska Gora, undated).
Tourism planning relates to the same basic concepts and approaches as general planning; however, it is adapted to the specific characteristics of the tourism system.A plan can be defined as a set of various decisions for action in the future (Hall, 2000). Several authors agree that the most significant feature of any type of planning, including tourism planning, is its orientation towards the future (Hall, 2000; Gunn, 2002). According to Inskeep (1991), planning for tourism is a step-by-step process which should be continuous, comprehensive, integrated, and environmental, focusing on achieving sustainable development and community involvement. Gunn (2002) similarly suggests that tourism planning should be directed towards four main goals: sustainable use of resources, enhanced visitor satisfaction, integration of local community and area and improved economy and business success.
Numerous authors emphasize the importance of tourism planning (Godfrey and Clarke, 2000; Hall, 2000; Gunn, 2002; Inskeep, 1991). According to Gunn (2002) the purpose of planning is to create plans of action for a foreseeable future and implement them. Furthermore, the tourism sector goals and objectives can be achieved more effectively and efficiently if carefully planned and integrated into the country's overall development plan and programme. In addition, careful planning at all levels and good management are necessary to optimize the benefits of tourism and preventing or at least mitigating any problems that may occur (Inskeep, 1991). Hall (2000) similarly suggests that planning can help to minimise potential negative impacts, maximise economic returns to the area, and thus encourage a more positive response from the local community towards tourism in the longer run. Moreover, in the countries, where not much tourism has developed yet, planning can provide the necessary guidelines for its development. On the other hand, for the areas where tourism is already well established, planning is often needed to revitalize the sector and maintain its future viability (World Tourism Organization, 1994).
In Kranjska Gora tourism planning could help to achieve long-term sustainable development of the area, ensuring that the natural, cultural, and other resources of tourism are conserved for the future use. Moreover, it could bring benefits to the society and provide level of tourist satisfaction essential for tourism success in the area and country as a whole. Tourism development plan for Kranjska Gora should provide a framework through which the area's tourism policy will be acted upon, ensuring the development reflects local values, and is an overall benefit to the tourism industry. As such the tourism plan should analyse the present situation in Kranjska Gora as well as provide recommendations for improvement in the area, based on sustainable development (e.g. modernisation of the ski lifts, improved road access etc.) (Strategy of Slovenian Tourism, undated).
Tourism planning at the destination level is a step-by-step process of resource and market analysis, action and review. Elements of a tourism plan together with the tourism planning process will now be evaluated and implications for the destination suggested. PASOLP planning approach, adapted from Baud-Bovy and Lawson (1998), in combination with Godfrey and Clarke's (2000) and World Tourism Organization's (1994) approach to tourism planning, will be used.
Plan implementation is in large part a political process due to government involvement in achieving implementation (Inskeep, 1991). Nonetheless, to achieve systematic and efficient implementation, the following techniques should be applied (adapted from Inskeep, 1991, and World Tourism Organization, 1994):
Project development or action programme together with adoption of specific legislation and regulations as well as estimation of costs. In Kranjska Gora each project, such as modernization of the ski lifts, should be evaluated in terms of costs, necessity as well as location and time frame;
Identification of the agencies and parties responsible for specific tourism projects in Kranjska Gora. Coordination among municipality of Kranjska Gora, various levels of Slovene government and the private sector is a vital element for a successful implementation;
Specification of tourist facility development and design standards, such as architectural styles and landscaping. These are generally administered by a separate design review committee or directly by the planning department. Kranjska Gora as a part of Alps, for example, has specific alpine style of architecture, which should be considered when building new accommodation as well as other tourist facilities in the area;
Specification of zoning and other land use regulations that define specific areas for different types of land uses and the development standards to be applied within each land use zone in Kranjska Gora. The physical planning department should be directly involved in the development of zoning regulations for the area;
Preparation of detailed area plans together with project feasibility studies;
Identification of potential funding sources for project development. Financial sources in Kranjska Gora may come from Slovene government as well as private sector wishing to invest in this area, including international investors;
Parks, conservation and cultural activities programmes also need to be considered. Kranjska Gora needs to take into account Alpine Convention of which the key objectives amongst other are long-term protection of the natural ecosystems and cultural interests of the indigenous population (The Alpine Convention, undated);
Other programmes such as those for employee training and education, public awareness, and economic enhancement should be further specified and implemented with funding provided and organisational structures established;
Procedures to monitor plan implementation and the general progress of tourism should be specified. It is essential that Kranjska Gora establishes a system to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of actions before tourism development takes place.
Communities, regions and countries benefit substantially from the proper tourism planning. Due to the tourism growth and its numerous and diverse impacts, Kranjska Gora should adopt a plan to manage these effects efficiently. It is necessary that planners consider both the costs and benefits that tourism brings to the area and that the principles of sustainable development are followed (Wall and Mathieson, 2006). Furthermore, in today's highly competitive tourism world, places with well planned tourism development are likely to be the most successful tourism destinations. A proper tourism plan, which would analyse Kranjska Gora's current position with regard to tourism, identify development opportunities as well as constraints, is therefore of a great importance for the destination. As such it could help to achieve higher tourist satisfaction levels and bring significant benefits, with minimal disturbance, to the society, local economy and the environment (Inskeep, 1991). It is crucial that the plan and its sub-components have respective time frames, towards which all involved parties, responsible for tourism development in Kranjska Gora, work in a coordinated manner to achieve the common long-term goals and objectives.