Distribution started to take over at the end of the twentieth century as one of the most critical factors for the competitiveness of tourism organizations and destinations. The development and growth of online travel, related to the expansion of information and communication technologies (ICTs), represents a paradigm shift in the tourism industry (Buhalis, 2003). Nowadays, electronic distribution is one of the most powerful marketing tools of the tourism sector, which is rapidly developing (O'Connor, 1999).
The first part of this assignment discusses theoretical issues related to distribution channels in travel and tourism. Thereafter the paper focuses on explanation of the chosen travel package and consumer profile, as well as evaluation of three different electronic distribution channels from the customer perspective. Finally, in the third part, recommendations to analysed organizations are provided.
The selected customers for the purpose of this assignment are going on a leisure trip to Iceland where they are going to spend five days, departing on 14th May 2007. They will fly from Manchester (UK) to Reykjavik with Icelandair and will be accommodated in a three-star hotel, Fosshotel Lind, with breakfast provided. The main purpose of their travel is special occasion, the 60 Furthermore, they are interested in health travelling, which encompasses gentle walking trails and spas in Iceland. In addition, they are very keen on the country's natural environment and are therefore going to choose their activities accordingly. They intend to visit some of the Iceland's most impressive sights, such as Gulfoss, Geysir and The Blue Lagoon. For more detail on the travel package please refer to Appendix 1.
Customer profile in this coursework will be analyzed according to Kotler's (1996) major segmentation variables. The profile of the customers refers to a married couple, Mary and Eric. Considering geographic segmentation variables their country of origin is United Kingdom, region Northern England and the city of York. In view of demographic variables, their age is 60 (Mary) and 58 (Eric). They are both retired and highly educated, Mary's previous occupation being biology professor and Eric's architect. Their religion is Catholic, race white and nationality British. Their gross income is According to Brassington and Pettit's (2000) Family Life Cycle model they could be categorized as In light of psychographic variables their social class is upper middles and their personality ambitious and active. Considering behavioural characteristics the benefits they seek from the holidays are action, discovery and health. Consumers can also be classified according to where they live. Numerous specialist companies, including CACI, offer geodemographic databases, such as ACORN, which categorises 1.9 million UK postcodes. Considering the place of residence and the postcode of analysed customers (YO1 4PD), the appropriate classification category is
This part of the coursework will focus on channel evaluation from a consumer perspective. Web site design and effectiveness will be analysed using the AID-10 website evaluation framework. Privacy, trust and security issues will also be evaluated. The three selected distribution channels for evaluation are an aggregator (Cosmos), an integrator (Expedia) and six principals (Fosshotel, Avis, Icelandair, Insurefor.com, BCP and Iceland Excursions). Detailed information supporting the evaluation can be found in appendices.
 According to Chaffey (2002), a good page design should allow the user to change the size of text. As some of the fonts used on Cosmos Web site are relatively small, Cosmos should provide a customer with an option of changing them into bigger ones. Very bright colours of the Web site are not particularly attractive from the customer's perspective. Cosmos should consider this if targeting older customers. The structure of the Web site could be improved, the amount of frames and tables reduced and the line widths increased. There should be no bad links on the Web site. Cosmos should pay particular attention to navigation facilities as navigating the Web site can be rather difficult for the customer. On some of the Web pages there is no feature 'Home' available to enable the customer to return to Cosmos Home page, which can be rather confusing. Online information search capabilities are important to provide users access to the information they require easily and quickly (Adam , 1999). Cosmos should consider offering a search engine on its Web site. In terms of value adding features, some additional could be introduced, such as 'Maps' or 'Fare watcher'. The Web site should also be improved in terms of personality and interactivity. Language options should be offered and visitor's basic information together with his/her preferences stored for the future use. Easily accessible customer support should also be available.
 A search engine as well 'What's new' functionality could be offered to allow customers easy and fast access to the required information. In terms of unique features, 'Fare watcher' feature could be introduced. There should be an option of other payment methods, such as for example sending a cheque by post, if a customer does not want to pay online. Expedia offers additional services such as attractions and airport parking. However, attractions for Iceland can only be booked until the end of year 2006 (less than a month ahead), which is not very convenient from the customer perspective. Expedia should consider this and improve their offer by making bookings available up to six months, for example. Another recommendation for Expedia would be to introduce intelligent agents (avatars) as a part of their Web site service. Avatars can be described as a piece of software which acts similar to human agents. They can become customer's personal assistants, performing different tasks for them as well as possessing an enormous amount of information about them together with their preferences (Werthner and Klein, 1999; O'Connor, 1999).
 Secondly, Fosshotel should consider introducing an option for the customer to choose either smaller or bigger fonts when browsing the Web site. Regarding the value adding feature, Fosshotel could perhaps add a feature 'Maps of Iceland'. Visitors, browsing the Web site, should feel that their special needs are attended to. Therefore, Fosshotel should consider giving more personal attention to customers and possibly introduce an option, where consumers can express their preferences regarding the room, meals etc. There should be an option of other payment methods in case a customer does not want to pay online.
 Avis's own search engine could improve search capability of the Web site and thus enhance customer satisfaction. Unique features increase the overall appeal of the Web site; however, Avis could possibly add some additional value adding features such as current gas prices or regulations with regard to driving in different countries. Offline payment options should also be on offer.
 In terms of personalization, Icelandair could offer customers to choose their preferences regarding meals and thus potentially increase their satisfaction.
 Insurefor.com should particularly focus on improving its Web site's search capabilities, as the Web site does not offer any search features to the customer. The company should consider giving more personal attention to the customer by offering a variety of language options, based on country target markets. Web site should also store basic customer's information and offer them suggestions of additional services or information based on their preferences. Insurefor.com should make sure there are no dead links on the Web site as they decrease customer satisfaction.
 Moreover, the size of some parts of the text should be altered or an option given to the customer of choosing bigger fonts. BCP should also apply more relevant images, related to car parking, to its Web site to make it more appealing to the user. According to Chaffey (2002) features such as Home, Main Page, Search, FAQ, Help and About Us are a necessary part of every Web site. As BCP Web site does not offer 'Home' and 'About us' features, it is recommended that the company applies them to their Web site. Personalization is another issue of which BCP should think of; customer's special needs and preferences with regard to car parking should be addressed (for example, customers could choose a specific parking space or could choose an option of having their cars washed while parked).
 Another issue, worth considering, is having a currency converter available on the Web site as customers can get the price for the excursions only in Iceland Kronas (ISK). Iceland Excursions should also ensure that there are no bad links on the Web site, providing the customer with a positive experience and a good impression of the company. Personalization is another issue that should be improved. Web site accounts could possibly be available not only to travel agents but to customers as well, allowing Iceland Excursions to store customers' information and preferences and keep them informed about special offers based on their preferences.
All of the analyzed Web sites should consider improving Web accessibility as most of them were rated average on this criterion. Web sites should therefore become more user-friendly for people with disabilities. Moreover, all of the Web sites were rated with a score 5 or lower in TrustGauge scoring chart, meaning that they were not recognized as particularly trustworthy by many users. As trust has become a vital antecedent for purchasing online (McCole, 2002), companies should make sure to increase trustworthiness of their Web sites.
Security is also of a great importance to maintain trust amongst customers. From the customer perspective, all of the analysed Web sites can be rated as good in terms of security, as their payment Web pages are highly encrypted and security certificates provided. It is important, however, for companies to make sure that once security measures are in place, an appropriate amount of content on the Web site is devoted to security issues to reassure the customer that online transactions on the web Site are safe (Chaffey, 2002). Expedia, Cosmos, Avis, Fosshotel, BCP and Insurefor.com devote a reasonable amount of content on their Web site to security issues; however, it could be argued that Icelandair and particularly Iceland Excursions should improve in terms of explaining and reassuring the customer that online booking through their Web sites is safe and secure.
The assignment has analysed three different electronic distribution channels from a customer perspective. All of the evaluated Web sites have their advantages as well as disadvantages and the analyzed organizations should work towards their improvement to enhance customer satisfaction. From consumers' point of view, integrator's (Expedia) Web site provided the best overall holiday booking experience.