was referred straight to A&E by her GP on the  for abdominal pain.
It is difficult from the examination and history to distinguish between appendicitis and an ectopic pregnancy. To confirm the diagnosis a bHCG test and ultrasound is required.
is a 22 year old teaching assistant with severe abdominal pain. She is worried about what this may be and is keen to be treated so she can go home.
was discharged on  on antibiotics. Her bHCG need to be repeated in 1 week to confirm there was no viable pregnancy.
Histology: No trophoblastic cells present, only a blood clot.
bHCG was re-measured to confirm there was no longer a viable pregnancy and results came back as less than 1.
Medical treatment for ectopic pregnancies is becoming more common and there is a lot of debate surrounding the use of whether a single or double dose of methotrexate should be administered. The multidose regime consists of an IM injection every other day (for a maximum of 4doses) of 1mg/Kg of body weight until bHCG falls by 15%. With the single dose a 50mg/m2 of body surface area is administered in 1 IM injection. Lipscomb et al carried out a study published in July 2005 comparing the success rates of single or multiple doses of methotrexate in 643 patients. They concluded that a single dose is as effective as a multidose, with success rates of 90% and 95% respectively. (1). These results contrast with a study carried out by Barnhart et al in 2004 who claimed multidoses were more effective, but they did agree with the Lipscomb study in the fact that single doses had far fewer side-effects. (2).
It is essential that ectopic pregnancies are diagnosed as early as possible which is sometimes difficult if bHCG levels are below the discriminatory levels for pregnancy and ultrasonography findings are inconclusive. A further, more conclusive, method of diagnosis could prevent serious complications and allow for therapies early on that may preserve tubal function. A study by Hammoud et al, published in June 2005 (3), investigated the use of ultrasonography endometrial patterns in achieving early diagnosis. In particular they looked at the presence of the trilaminar pattern and a thinner endometrium in ectopic pregnancies as compared to a normal intrauterine pregnancy. They studied 441 patients from 1999 to 2003 and concluded that the endometrium was thinner in ectopic than normal pregnancies and this measurement was a good predictor of ectopic pregnancies. However they also concluded that although the trilaminar pattern was 94% specific for ectopic pregnancies, it had very low sensitivity (38%).
There are various risk factors associated with ectopic pregnancies, which patients should be made aware of. Some patients, such as  have no obvious identifiable risk factors, but the risk can be increased by several factors as demonstrated by Tay et al in their review. They claimed that the following were significant risk factors:
(4)
An ectopic pregnancy refers to any pregnancy that occurs outside the uterine cavity. The most common site of extrauterine implantation is in the fallopian tubes (97%). Of these most implant in the ampulla and 25% in the isthmus. 3% implant on the ovary, cervix or peritoneum (5).
The UK incidence is about 1:100 and is rising (6). There were 11 reported maternal deaths due directly to ectopic pregnancy between 200-2002 in the UK (7).
Ectopics can present acutely, as in 's case. The classic symptoms include amenorrhoea, lower abdominal pain and uterine bleeding. The period of amenorrhoea is usually 6-8 weeks, but an ectopic can present before a period is missed, as in 's case. This highlights one of CEMACH key recommendations that an ectopic needs to be a differential for all women of reproductive age with abdominal pain, even if they have no other symptoms. The vaginal bleeding can vary from a brown discharge to the equivalent of a normal period.
I have learnt form this case how important it is to always suspect an ectopic pregnancy in women of child-bearing age, but also how difficult it is on history and examination to distinguish it from appendicitis. I have had the opportunity to learn about management, both surgical and medical.