When first considering an area of study for this module, numerous subjects initially came to my attention, although I had a vague familiarity with the majority as a result of my previous degree. Then it struck me that within my time at medical school, I had already met several patients with histories of breast carcinoma during other aspects of the course and yet I knew virtually nothing about this condition. Whilst discussing this with colleagues it soon became apparent that unlike most people, I had never had first hand experience of people suffering from breast cancer as fortunately I knew of no family members or friends who had undergone the trauma of a diagnosis. I found this quite surprising given the high rates of incidence, and therefore decided to use this opportunity to gain an insight into the disease.
Once I began investigating the condition further, it immediately struck me that I was going to have a difficult job ahead of me, purely due to the sheer volume of literature which appeared to be available. From the outset I had decided that a general overview would be most beneficial, although as I my interest grew, it became increasingly difficult to maintain this ideal as I found myself focusing upon fascinating, albeit obscure aspects of breast cancer research.
I feel I have gained a great deal from this module, as it has increased my clinical understanding of this condition and furthered my interest into this diverse area of medical research. In addition, it has also allowed me to gain a better appreciation of the range of emotional effects it may have upon the patients themselves. I sincerely believe that this knowledge base will be of great value in future, particularly when discussing what may be an uncomfortable topic for many patients.
An estimated 1 in 3 people will develop cancer during the course of their lives, of which the four most common cancers - breast, lung, colorectal and prostate - account for over half of the 270,000 new cases of malignant cancer registered each year (1). For many years, breast cancer has been the most common cancer amongst women. With over 41,000 new cases being diagnosed each year, it accounts for one in three of all female cancer cases and the lifetime risk for developing breast cancer is estimated to be as high in one in nine. It is therefore unsurprising that breast cancer is the second biggest cause of cancer mortality in the UK, with figures suggesting that 12,000 women die of breast cancer each year (Figure 1.1) (2).
Furthermore, an even greater number of women present to their doctor each year concerned about malignancy as a result of breast lumps, despite the fact that 90% of these symptoms arise from benign lesions (2). In addition, the success of media campaigns and advertisements over the past 20 years aimed at raising breast cancer awareness has lead to even greater levels of women seeking medical assistance (3).
As a result of these trends medical professionals are coming into contact with patients concerned about breast cancer more frequently. It is therefore important that practitioners are able to develop an understanding of the disease processes involved so they can competently identify possible malignancies when necessary. In addition, they must also be aware of the varied psychological implications breast disease may have upon the patients presenting to them, irrespective of whether or not their initial fear of malignancy is justified.
The aim of this dissertation is to provide a broad overview of the major features associated with breast cancer in women. It will start by examining the normal breast anatomy and physiology, the pathological processes involved, the clinical features of the disease and the methods by which can be detected and diagnosed. The available treatment options and prognosis will subsequently be discussed. Various social and psychological issues are also associated with breast cancer particularly with regard to screening, diagnosis and treatment. These issues will be highlighted and discussed where appropriate. Additional patient case studies will also be used to address more specific social and psychological problems which may be faced by patients.
It is important to appreciate at this stage that certain important omissions will unfortunately be made due to the limited coverage available. As mentioned above benign breast diseases account for a large proportion of breast masses, however these will not be discussed in further detail despite their significance. Although a comparatively rare phenomenon, carcinoma of the breast may also present in males, however given the rarity of this condition it too will not be discussed in the following dissertation. Finally, the numerous complications which may occur as a result of breast cancer, metastatic disease and the medical and surgical interventions used will not be discussed due to the extent of this topic.
The breast represents a down-growth of the epidermis which usually only develops significantly in females (4). The main structures contained within the breast tissue are the mammary glands which are involved in the production and expression of milk. These glands therefore represent an important accessory to reproduction in women (5). The mammary gland is attached to the dermis of the overlying skin by the suspensory ligaments of the breast. These ligaments represent thickenings in the connective tissue stroma, and are particularly prominent in superior part of the breast in order to provide support for the glandular lobules. At its posterior margin, the circular base of the breast rests on the deep pectoral fascia overlying pectoralis major and serratus anterior, there is however a loose connective tissue plane between these two structures which gives rise to the retromammary space. This is a potential space which contains a small amount of fat and therefore permits movement of the breast over the fascial layer. The base of the breast extends transversely from the lateral sternal border to the mid axillary line (MAL) and vertically from the 2 nd to 6 th ribs, but the gland also extends laterally towards the axilla forming the axillary tail. The mammary glands are highly vascular, being supplied by perforating branches of the subclavian and axillary arteries (Figure 2.1). In addition they also receive arterial blood from the thoracic aorta via the posterior intercostal arteries which enter the 2 nd, 3 rd and 4 th intercostal spaces (6).
Venous drainage of the breast is primarily to the axillary vein, although the internal thoracic veins are also involved (Figure 2.2).
An understanding of the lymphatic supply of the breast is highly important, due to the role it plays in metastatic cancer (Figure 2.3). The subareolar lymphatic plexus receives drainage from the nipple, areola and lobules. The majority of lymph from this region originates from the lateral breast quadrants and drains into the axillary lymph nodes and accessory nodes such as the interpectoral, deltopectoral, supraclavicular or inferior deep cervical nodes. In contrast, lymph from the medial quadrants drains to either the parasternal nodes or the opposite breast. Lymph from the lower quadrants may also pass inferiorly to the phrenic (abdominal) nodes (6).
Prior to puberty the breast lacks any form of glandular tissue, exhibiting only a few small ducts connected to the nipple. With the onset of thelarche (breast development) there is increased deposition of fat and connective tissue, and the ducts also increase in length and begin to branch, forming terminal buds. Further breast growth and glandular development occurs with the onset of menses, in response to the associated hormonal changes and continues until the age of 25. This developmental process is primarily regulated by the interaction of oestrogen, progesterone and prolactin levels, however several other hormones are also believed to have a minor role (Figure 2.4). It has been difficult to determine the precise role of each hormone since they may have both growth and secretory effects; however this process is evidently accelerated by pregnancy during this period (5).
As a result of its role in milk production, the structure of the mammary gland is best described during pregnancy as it only during this period that the tissue is fully functional. Like most compound glands the structure of the gland can be thought to consist of lobes, lobules and ducts (Figure 2.5). Each lobe contains a branching duct system that extends into the fibroadipose tissue of the breast, terminating in groups of lobules. The lobules represent the secretory units, which contain of a variable number of acini surrounded by loose connective tissue. Each acinus is composed of epithelial cells and myoepithelial cells, which have secretory and mechanical functions respectively. The main role of the epithelial cells is secretion of milk during later pregnancy and post-partum; however they also continuously secrete various glycoproteins into the glandular lumen. In contrast the myoepithelial cells form a discontinuous layer, which surrounds the basement membrane, and contain contractile proteins which promote passage of the secretions through the duct system (5).
The groups of lobules associated with each lobe are connected via a series of intra and extra-lobular ducts to an individual lactiferous duct which subsequently empties onto the surface of the breast. There are approximately 15-20 lactiferous ducts, each draining a segment of the breast, which converge towards the centre of the nipple like the spokes of a bicycle wheel. Before opening at the nipple, each duct exhibits a lactiferous sinus which permits the accumulation of milk in the lactating mother. The nipple itself contains connective tissue and smooth muscle cells which allow the formation of a circular sphincter. The area surrounding the nipple, known as the areola, also contains numerous sebaceous glands which enlarge during pregnancy and secrete an oily substance to protect against irritation and chaffing which may occur when nursing (5).
In the non-pregnant state (i.e. when lactation is not occurring), the lactiferous ducts end in a group of blind, saccular evaginations which exhibit relatively few, if any, lobules. The most noticeable characteristic of breast tissue during pregnancy is therefore the formation of lobules and lobes. It is this development of glandular tissue along with increased fat deposition which results in the breast enlargement associated with pregnancy. Following pregnancy, further adipose tissue replaces the lobular alveolar tissue (4).
The breast also undergoes minor changes during each menstrual cycle, in response to the variations which occur in the circulating levels of sex steroids (Figure 2.6). During the post-ovulation secretory phase, the rising oestrogen and gonadotrophin (e.g. LH and FSH) levels cause the lobular stroma to become oedematous, resulting in breast enlargement and the sensation of tenderness that is often experienced prior to menstruation. In addition both progesterone and oestrogen promote cell division mitosis during this period, and although subsequent apoptosis ensures the overall balance is maintained, it may cause temporary lumpiness of the breast. It is important to appreciate these normal physiological changes and the times at which they occur in order to provide reassurance to concerned patients. As a result however, it is usually beneficial to examine the breasts of pre-menopausal women in the first half of the cycle (5).
With increasing age, breast tissue also undergoes changes due to the altered sex steroid levels, which accompany decreasing ovarian function. For example, the connective tissue of the lobules changes from a loose to a dense structure, the basement membrane thickens and the cells lining the acini are lost (5). These changes start during the pre-menopausal period and continue past the menopause, until old age is reached by which point the breast is primarily composed of adipose tissue. Importantly these changes occur at an uneven rate which frequently results in clinically palpable lumps (8).
Given the high incidence rates, it is not surprising that there has been significant research interest in the aetiological mechanisms associated with the development of breast carcinoma. As a result, numerous risk factors have been identified which correlate with an increased risk of pathogenesis. In most cases it is uncertain whether the individual factors act as initiators or promoters, due to the complex interactions between them (5). Some of these factors will be examined below.
The majority of well established risk factors which have been identified for breast cancer are non modifiable and therefore unlike the association between smoking and lung cancer, there is no single major cause which can be easily avoided. It has however been shown that the success rates for treatment are closely linked to the stage of the cancer at presentation, and as a result it is thought that a reduction in mortality from breast cancer can logically be achieved through screening processes which allow early detection (17).
Mammography is the favoured screening technique, because unlike clinical examination and self-breast examination, it has been shown in several randomised control trials to reduce mortality from breast cancer. For example, studies by Forest, Shapiro and Tabar showed reductions in mortality of between 20-50% in women over fifty who were screened regularly (19, 20 ,21). In contrast, there is no evidence to support population screening of women under forty who are not at increased risk of breast cancer. Instead the evidence from this group indicates that the incidence of breast cancer is significantly lower, the sensitivity of mammography is reduced and the risk of radiation-induced cancer is relatively high (22). No randomised control trials have yet been published specifically examining women between these two age groups, however subgroup analysis of RCTs including this group indicate that any benefits are outweighed by large numbers of false positives and benign biopsies, as well as the financial implications of unnecessary recall and follow-up (23).
Screening is defined as the application of diagnostic measures to an apparently healthy population in order to detect serious disease at an early stage when treatment is more likely to be curative than it is at a later stage. Before any screening process can be introduced, there are several criteria as proposed by the World Health Organisation (WHO) that should ideally be met. These are summarised in table 4.1 along with the evidence to support the use of mammography for breast cancer screening.
As table 4.1 indicates, mammography fulfils most the requirements for a screening programme and in 1988 the Forrest committee published its recommendations for introducing a National Breast Screening Programme (NHSBSP) aimed at targeting the two strongest risk factors i.e. being female and older age (19). The NHSBSP (Figure 4.1) was subsequently introduced in 1990.
Since its introduction, the NHSBSP has screened than 14 million women and detected over 80,000 cancers. As a result it has lead to a significant improvement in overall survival (Figure 4.2), saving an estimated 300 lives each year (25, 26).
Although the screening programme has been a significant success statistically, it is important to consider the psychosocial effects it may have upon those being assessed.
As mammography requires compression of the breast, temporary physical discomfort is often reported. More importantly it has also been shown to have adverse psychological affects (27). For example, Cockburn et al examined the emotional, social and physical functioning of women undergoing screening and reported that those recalled suffered significant dysfunction which continued for a period even after obtaining notification that there was no sign of cancer (28). Therefore given that up to 10% of women are recalled for further investigations, large numbers of women may be at risk of adverse psychological consequences. It is therefore essential that results are accurately interpreted to minimise the false positive recall rate, and that counselling services are available at recall assessment centres.
Appropriately 90% of breast cancers are discovered as a lump by the patient or their partner (2). Patients may also present with a history of pain and no mass, with breast enlargement, or with a nondescript thickening in the breast. Due to the non-specific nature of presentation a structured method of assessment is required in order to prevent cases being missed. The system used to investigate suspected breast carcinoma is generally known as the "triple assessment". Following referral to a specialist breast cancer clinic, the patient will past through three stages of investigation which are outlined below (29):
The treatment of breast cancer is dependent upon the stage of the disease and can broadly be classified as either early or advanced breast cancer.
Following diagnosis and treatment, questions understanably arise from patients regarding the prognosis and likelihood of cure. As with all forms of malignancy, breast cancer is an unpredictable condition however a number of factors can be used to give an indication of how successful treatment might have been (30). As previously mention the TNM staging system is the commonest method of predicting survival. The estimated lengths of survival for each stage are summarised in table 7.1.
A more established and validated model for predicting disease-specific survival in women with breast carcinoma is the Nottingham Prognostic Index (NPI), however this operates under the assumption that adjuvant therapy is not used (48). The NPI is routinely measured following tumour resection and separates women into three risk categories using a simple equation that depends on tumour size, tumour grade and lymph node status (Figure 7.1).
Patients are subsequently classified as having either a good outcome with a high chance of a cure (<3.4), a moderate chance of cure (3.4-5.4) or a poor prognosis with a smaller chance of cure (>5.4). Although the NPI is a useful guide, it is not absolutely reliable and there will always be many patients whose NPI predictions do not match the reality of their individual outcomes (48).
Regardless of the prognosis, it is essential that appropriate emotional and informational support is provided and accessible. Patients experiencing further recurrence and those requiring palliative care, may express an unpredictable variety of emotions ranging from relatively good adjustment to severe psychosocial morbidity. (49). It is therefore important that individual needs can be identified and the appropriate services provided as and when necessary.
Even though the majority of women adjust well, some survivors may also continue to experience psychological morbidity after treatment ends. Studies suggest that younger pre-menopausal women are especially vulnerable to depression and anxiety compared to their older counterparts and therefore exhibit greater psychosocial and information needs (50).
Breast cancer has been shown to be a significant cause of morbidity and mortality which affects thousands of women every year. The ability to understand this disease and initiate further investigation when necessary is therefore important quality for any clinician.
When investigating breast cancer it is important to be aware of the normal physiological changes which occur during pregnancy and menstruation in response to the changing hormone levels. Breast examination should therefore be carried out in the first half of the menstrual cycle in pre-menopausal women whenever possible. In post-menopausal women, abnormalities may also arise due to the changing composition of the breast tissue. The importance of understanding the breast anatomy was also highlighted due to frequency with which metastatic disease occurs in breast cancer, particular to the axillary region.
Various risk factors for breast cancer pathogenesis were described including the established correlations with age, gender and family history. The effects of extended exposure to unopposed oestrogen were also considered along with evidence suggesting HRT and the OCP have possible harmful effects. Furthermore, obesity may in future prove to be an important factor as a result of the oestrogen production associated with adipose cells. Additional risk factors were such as smoking, alcohol and breast feeding were also addressed and although it may be important to consider these factors during the clinical assessment, the aetiological mechanisms by which these factors influence breast cancer are still not fully understood.
The majority of breast adenocarcinomas arise from ductal epithelium. In situ carcinomas such as DCIS usually present as small palpable masses in women of all ages and nipple involvement may also be an associated complaint. Alternatively, LCIS frequently arises in pre-menopausal women in the absence of a detectable mass. Invasive cancers usually present with additional signs such as skin tethering, although this is dependent upon the tumour composition. IDC is typically unifocal and accounts for the majority of invasive cancers in both pre- and post-menopausal women, although the more aggressive invasive lobular carcinomas still represent about 10% of infiltrating cancers.
Since the NHSBSP was introduced to target breast cancer in older women, it has had a considerable impact upon the incidence rates and rates of survival; however it is not without its limitations. Studies indicated that adverse psychological effects may arise without proper support services, and an appropriate screening programme has yet to be developed for those at risk of early onset breast cancer.
The use of the triple assessment was also discussed along with additional investigations, which have been introduced as moves are made towards tumour specific treatments. At present mammography remains the cornerstone of screening, although technologies such as ultrasonography and MRI have an increasingly defined role in non-invasive diagnosis. The promising research supporting the use of MRI for screening was also examined and hopefully this will provide a method for assessing younger high-risk populations in the future.
The major surgical techniques currently used for management of breast cancer have in essence changed very little for many years, however advances in imaging and the introduction of novel techniques such as sentinel node lymphadectomy aim to improve the precision of these techniques. Although the ultimate goal of treatment remains improved survival, an increasing emphasis is now put on less morbid treatments and improved quality of life. These advances will hopefully allow less invasive procedures to be carried out, helping to minimise the physical and psychological impact of surgery.
In addition, the introduction of herceptin and advances towards other biological response modifiers promises to provide further tumour-specific therapies which may prove especially valuable against metastatic disease.
Despite the use of various prognostic measures, the ability to accurately determine the prognosis of individual patients remains difficult. However as further research is carried out, a greater understanding of the types of support particular patients require is being obtained and if appropriate support programmes are subsequently introduced, then this arguably improves the outlook for individuals whatever the prognosis.
In the future, prevention is expected to remain a major focus, particularly in women at high risk of developing breast cancer because of mutations in susceptibility genes. Current research is also focusing upon the possible use of mammary ductoscopy for screening and diagnosis, and the development of immunotherapy treatments and breast cancer vaccines.
Mammary ductoscopy (MD) is an emerging technique that allows direct visualisation of the mammary duct system. Using a sub-millimetre fibreoptic micro-endoscope inserted through the ductal opening on the nipple surface, it is possible to obtain video images as well as ductal washings for cytological analysis. There is a growing body of evidence that MD may have a role in the investigation of women with pathological nipple discharge, the guiding of breast conserving surgery and the screening of high risk women. Although research is required to confirm these potential applications and the feasibility of its use in the outpatient setting under local anaesthesia, the addition of molecular and genetic analysis of cells obtained by MD and the emergence of newer generations of microendoscopes are likely to enhance the use of this technique (51).
As result of the significant advances in biotechnology and immunology, research is also being carried out to investigate the possible use of vaccines to harness the power of the immune system in the fight against breast cancer. It is believed that cancer vaccines would have several therapeutic advantages over traditional breast cancer treatment therapies. For example, by targeting the anti-tumour immune response to critical tumour-specific antigens it would provide a therapy with exquisite specificity and minimal toxicity.
In addition, immune-mediated tumour destruction would occur by mechanisms distinct from those underlying the efficacy of chemotherapy and hormone therapy. Therefore immunotherapy would offer an approach to circumventing the intrinsic drug resistance that currently underlies therapeutic failure.
Finally, the phenomenon of immunologic memory also gives immunotherapy the potential to create a durable therapeutic effect that can be reactivated at the onset of disease relapse. The use of immunologic memory also underlies the potential future use of vaccines for the prevention of breast cancer. Early clinical trials have highlighted the promise of immunotherapy as an additional major therapeutic modality for breast cancer, with the potential for breast cancer prevention as well as treatment (52).