Ion exchange is a separation which is based on retaining ionised species onto a solid support. Walton (1983) defined it as 'the selective removal of a single, or group of charged species from one liquid phase flowed by transfer to a second liquid phase by means of a solid ion exchange material.' Anything that is ionised can be separated for example, metal ions, proteins, amino acids or sugars. On an industrial scale, it may be used for processes such as demineralisation or protein recovery. The principle can be applied to sensitive analytical procedures for example HPLC (High Performance Liquid Chromatography). These species can be selectively removed or in groups from a solution. This means that it must involve the process of adsorption which in IEC is electrostatic, due to different charges on the solutes.
Anion exchangers uphold fixed positive charges for example amines, or quaternary ammonia. They may also be used to separate polyelectrolytes. Proteins are an example of these, as they have both positive and negative charges, they may also be described as ampiphilic. The effect of the ion exchange depends on the overall charge of the exchanger and this must be opposite to those of the protein. This means that it is highly pH dependant. By changing the pH of the mobile phase, the selectivity of the ion exchanger can be influenced and the desired proteins can be chosen.
Conditions are made that allow different components and molecules to move through at various speeds. For example, when the ionic strength is low, components will be adsorbed at the top of the column due to their affinity with the ion exchanger. There will be nothing in the mobile phase. This ionic strength is altered by the addition of NaCl which compete for proteins in the sample at different concentrations. This means that until a certain ionic strength is achieved, certain proteins will remain in the column. The principle of a salt gradient makes use of the Donnan Equilibrium, which states that the chemical potential of a material must be the same inside and outside the column. The competition from the salt gives rise to the exchange process.
Whey proteins make up approximately 20% of the total protein in milk. There are thousands of other protein types in milk. The enzyme lactoperoxidase is responsible for catalysing the reaction in which ABTS is oxidised into ABTS- in the presence of H
A detailed account of the procedure can be found on the hand out.
The resin was equilibrated to pH6.3. The whey sample was injected into the column at a rate of 3ml/min. From the sample, the proteins that are required become absorbed into the resin. Any contaminants keep flowing through the process. The desired proteins are eluted with a 40-100% salt gradient, 300ml. This means that the ionic strength is increasing. i.e. the salt concentration increases. 19 whey fractions were collected and these were analysed using a BCA assay so that the total protein could be determined. A lactoperoxidase activity assay (LP Assay) was also used. The procedure for these is given on the hand out.