Frozen desserts include ice cream, frozen yoghurts, ice milk, sherbet and ices (Arbuckle, 1972). Of these, ice cream is considered to be the most commercially important in the frozen desserts category (Varnham & Sutherland, 1994).
Within the UK, ice cream is defined as a frozen product containing a minimum of 5% fat and 2.5% cent milk protein. This is achieved by subjecting an emulsion of fat, milk solids and sugar or sweeteners, with or without extra ingredients, to heat treatment and then freezing (Regulations, 1996).
An emulsion is a system of droplets that are suspended in a continuous immiscible phase and are separated by an interfacial layer which is occupied by a surfactant material which contain proteins (Friberg et al., 2004).
Ice cream is a colloidal system; small particles of one phase are dispersed into a continuous phase. Ice cream is an emulsion (fat), a sol (sugars, polysaccharides / stabilizers, milk proteins and ice crystals) and a foam (air), often with 50% air, referred to as over run. It is a microstructure which consists of fat droplets, ice crystals and air bubbles suspended in a viscous solution which makes up the matrix (Clarke, 2004).
The dispersion of fat globules in ice cream mix depends on forces which tend to pull fat globules apart - the homogenizer valve and repulsion between fat globules due to their electrical charges. Freezing can affect the stability of fat globules in ice cream. The globules agglomerate due to agitation and the concentration effect of freezing. The rate of this agglomeration may also be affected by protein stability, melting point of the fat, types of emulsifier, stabilizer and sugars and the salt content (Marshall & Arbuckle, 1996).
Dryness is related to emulsion instability. This is due to agglomeration of milk fat globules which slows down the rate of melt down. Agglomeration may therefore be desirable. However, if agglomeration goes too far, it may cause churning. Negative charges of the fat globules, which cause them to repel each other, are lost or overcome by agitation. An ideal mix is one where all the fat is agglomerated but in which none visibly churns out. In this condition, ice cream possesses optimal textural properties, body, dryness and stiffness. Certain emulsifiers tend to destabilize the fat which can accelerate churning. Excessive destabilization results in a slow melt down but the ice cream retains its shape or structure (Marshall & Arbuckle, 1996).
The use of whey protein as a replacement for other milk proteins is common but as the amount of whey protein increases, the amount of de-emulsified fat decreases which results in a softer and wetter ice cream. The desorption of whey protein by monoglycerides is less effective in comparison to caseins. The increased emulsion stability exhibited by whey proteins can be counteracted by either increasing the monoglyceride concentration or by applying more effective unsaturated monoglycerides (Whitehurst, 2004).
The proposed investigation will take the following form.
Obtaining different monoglyceride emulsifiers, predominantly monostearate monooleate, and monolinoleate, based on their level of saturation.
Preparation of ice cream mixes and products using each of the different types of emulsifiers. The ice cream will have a low pH. This will be achieved by the addition of fruit based ingredients, which are high in acidity. The ice cream mixes will be made using a standard method. The type of protein in the system will be controlled. Each emulsifier will be tested at a range of protein concentrations.
The emulsions will be tested for their stability according to the monoglyceride used and the level of protein in the mix. The following tests will be carried out.
Measurement of free fat by solvent extraction. This will provide a measurement of the amount of fat that has been de-emulsified by the emulsifier.
Analysis of particle size of the fat globules in the mix using the Malvern Particle Size Analyzer. This will provide information on the different sizes and shapes of the de-emulsified fats in the ice cream samples.
Measurement of the meltdown properties of the ice cream samples at immediately after freezing and after storage. This will involve observing changes in the shape, the rate at which the ice cream drips and the weight lost during melting over a period of time. Consistent volume, over run and dimensions of the sample will be important for this test.
Measurement of firmness of the ice cream product using a penetrometer. The test will be performed at immediately after freezing and after the ice cream has been stored to test how its firmness changes over time.
Assessment of organoleptic properties of the mixes through sensory analysis to evaluate the acceptability of the ice cream textures. This will complement other tests performed in the investigation.