Freezing is a well established method of preserving foods whilst maintaining a high quality. It is better than any other method at preserving taste, texture and nutritional quality.
The objective of freezing is to maintain the original characteristics of the product as much as possible. Possible quality issues in frozen foods include diffusion of water, protein denaturation and lipid oxidation.
There are two main stages of the freezing process. The first is nucleation in which ice crystals begin to form. These crystals increase in size, the rate of which is determined by the rate of reaction at the crystal surface, rate of water diffusing to the growing crystal and the rate of heat removal. The second stage is heat removal from the product. This will depend on the physical dimensions of the product such as volume and density. The specific heat of the product and therefore its thermal conductivity are also factors.
Plate freezers, as used in the first experiment are a type of contact freezer. This means the product is in direct contact with the freezing medium, in this case sandwiched between two plates. Cold refrigerant flows through the gaps in between the plates which chills the plates and in turn freezes the product. There are two forms of the plate freezer, vertical and horizontal. For this experiment a horizontal plate freezer was used, it is more common for packaged food.
Enzymatic activity can result in quality degradation in frozen foods. Lowering the temperature of food below its freezing point can alter enzyme activity due to changes in the environment such as pH, ionic strength and solute concentrations. Hydrolytic activities can result in textural softening and colour loss, although the main problem associated with frozen fruit products is enzymatic browning.
In fruits enzymatic browning is caused by polyphenol oxidase. In order for enzymatic browning to occur, the enzyme, substrate and oxygen must all be present. If one or more of this factors is missing, enzymatic browning can be retarded or delayed. Treatments to prevent this from occurring are based on this principle.