was on an emergency referral SOS list with his respiratory physician, and was therefore admitted directly to the respiratory ward following self-referral.
The presenting symptoms (i.e. wheezing, breathlessness, reduced PEFR) are typical of an acute asthma attack and given Mr 's history of chronic asthma, this is the most likely diagnosis. The onset of breathlessness at night also points towards asthma. As  appears to be a particularly fragile asthmatic, it is likely that his recent infection has precipitated this acute attack. On admission  was unable to complete sentences and his PEFR was significantly reduced (38% of normal) indicating an acute severe attack. A PEFR between 33%-50% usually suggests a severe attack, whilst &lt;38% is regarded as life-threatening. On examination, the respiratory and cardiovascular systems should be examined. Specific signs should be sought in order to allow the severity to be assessed further. For example an increased respiratory rate (&gt;25/min) and tachycardia (&gt;110/min) would be expected in a severe attack. However bradycardia, hypotension and a reduced respiratory effort (or silent chest) may develop as the episode increases in severity and becomes life threatening. Other signs associated with hypoxia may also occur in life-threatening attack such as cyanosis, exhaustion and confusion. ABG values are also important for assessing the severity therefore results will be obtained if available.
Important differential diagnoses to exclude would include an acute infective exacerbation of COPD, pulmonary oedema (cardiac asthma), URTI, PE, pneumothorax, anaphylactic shock and airway obstruction by a foreign body or tumour. Most of these are unlikely given his history. For example Mr  has no history of COPD, has never smoked and has not travelled recently. On admission, a CXR would be performed and therefore allow pneumothorax, pleural oedema and infection to be ruled out. The recent chest infection however may have exacerbated his asthma leading to this acute attack therefore signs of infection should be sought on the CXR.
A PEFR of 38%, RR&gt;25 and the inability to complete sentences all correlate with a acute severe attack as outlined in the BTS guidelines for asthma management. Although Mr  also exhibited a silent chest in the lower zones, there were no additional signs to suggest a life-threatening attack. For example SpO 2=100%, PaO 2=16.9O and there was no evidence of hypotension, bradycardia or cyanosis. Physical examination also revealed evidence to suggest a lower respiratory tract infection, particularly in the left lung. However a chest x-ray was not available to allow radiological confirmation. It is proposed that the silent lower lobes initially detected may have been due to partially collapsed lobes arising due to the LRTI, however again this would radiological confirmation. Following examination therefore the most likely diagnosis is an acute severe asthma attack secondary to the recent LRTI. There was no evidence to suggest a cardiac origin for the breathlessness and no ABG abnormalities were detected.
Mr  is suffering from an acute severe asthma attack and a LRTI. As  is an intelligent patient who understands his condition well and knows when to approach the hospital for additional treatment, this recent attack is unlikely to have any psychological implications upon his health. However it is important to consider that  may be concerned about the possibility of requiring admission to ICU or another prolonged stay. In particular the implications a prolonged stay would have upon his family and employment. Fortunately  reported having an extremely supportive family and employer, however these are undoubtedly important issues to consider in asthmatic patients especially as emotion stress is itself a proven trigger factor.
was followed-up as an in-patient two days after admission. On examination he was sat up comfortably and could easily talk without becoming breathless (RR=11). His PEFR was stable at around 380. Two weeks later at clinic, he reported a stable PEFR of around 450-500 and despite one incidence of dyspnoea, which required the use of home oxygen (for ~1.5hrs) he was generally well. No further fixed follow-up was therefore arranged.
As a result of the high prevalence of asthma within the general population, a vast amount of information exists within the literature. Fortunately the british thoracic society has published guidelines to aid physicians with the diagnosis and treatment of asthma based upon the best available evidence. The 'British guideline on the management of asthma' therefore provides a valuable resource when treating asthmatics (British Thoracic Society, 2003).
This case has highlighted the importance of rapidly diagnosing and initiating treatment in patients with a suspected asthma attack. In a case such as this it is essential that appropriate therapy is given immediately with a view to regaining control of the asthma, no matter what the cause of the attack. These patients should be closely supervised and subsequent re-assessment should be carried out frequently to ensure that any further deterioration is detected and addressed appropriately. Once the patient has been stabilised, further investigations should be performed to identify potential causes for the acute exacerbation (e.g. infection, recent change in medication). This case has also highlighted the importance of patient education and the need to consider psychosocial factors such as unemployment when treating chronic asthmatics.