Since Neolithic times, Man has dramatically altered the landscape of Britain from a former almost blanket forest cover more than 12,000 years ago to a predominantly open landscape today. The present landscape is made up of a variety of habitats. As well as woodland, there are also those created by Man, including moorlands (especially on the uplands), heathlands and grasslands. These are 'plagioclimatic communities', habitats that have been arrested a particular stage of succession, and are maintained under various forms of management pressure such as burning and grazing.
Grazing comes in many forms. The major grazing animals of Britain today are cattle, ponies, sheep, deer, and rabbits. The main effects by herbivores are grazing, trampling, elimination and nutrient input. Grazers vary in what vegetation they eat and how. Sheep are able to crop the grass to a very small height (mm) due to their jaw and teeth structure, whereas cattle tear grass with their tongues. Ponies also crop the grass to a short height but are important in nutrient cycling of an area (Putman et al., 1989).
In temperate systems, heath, acid grasslands and bogs experience lower grazing pressure during a year than woodlands (especially deciduous). The latter are used constantly thoughout the year for shelter and feeding. Various improved grasslands also have a high level of use by herbivores. Ponies spend half their time on grasslands over a year (Putman, 1986).
Grazing animals have an immediate influence on the functioning and development of a community by altering the relative abundance of plant species. Often, palatable plants are eaten at expense of less-favoured coarse species and in time the latter comes to dominate a habitat.
This report aims to give a brief overview of the effects of grazing pressure on upland moorland, lowland heathland, lowland deciduous forest and grassland habitats of Britain. The role of grazing in conservation is discussed. 'Browsing' is included in the meaning of 'grazing' in this review.
We have seen grazing can have a detrimental effect on woodland biodiversity and maintenance (Putman, 1986; Putman et al., 1989). The New Forest woodlands suffer from high levels of grazing by a range of herbivores. Structural diversity severely limited under heavy grazing by preventing regeneration, sometimes missing ground-flora and shrub layers all together. Such impacts on the vegetation have knock-on effects on associated wildlife. Under little grazing pressure, vegetational and faunal communities are more diverse.
Intensive grazing on the uplands can cause community change from heather moorland to non-diverse acid grasslands, dominated by species such as Molinia and Nardus. Scorching by urine affects heath plants and promotes aggressive grasses. Trampling and excreta can be a problem on lowland heaths, putting wild fauna such as reptiles at risk.
However, grazing can be an appropriate and necessary element in the maintenance of valuable habitats, particularly plagioclimatic communities. It has been seen that a degree of grazing is required to ensure their maintenance and high quality (Smallshire et al., 1997). Sustainable levels of grazing intensity are crucial in maintaining high quality habitats in the long term. If too high, a habitat will deteriorate; if too little grazing, a habitat may resume its successional pathway to woodland.
For example, grazing may enhance diversity of grasslands by suppressing aggressive grasses and increasing the number of bare patches by trampling into which broad-leaved grasses may colonise and establish. Upland and lowland heath with >50% ground cover of dwarf shrubs may be maintained at high quality by subjection to low-level grazing to control invasive plants without suppressing heath vegetative growth and minimising the destructive effect of trampling. This practice is best used in conjunction with planned small-scale burns to vary dwarf shrub age structure.
Other plagioclimatic communities including wetlands (reed swamps, fen meadows etc) and sand dunes are maintained by a certain level of disturbance. Wetlands and sand dunes may be maintained to a large extent by grazing (Rieley & Page, 1990).
Vandvik et al. (2005) stress the importance of traditional land management regimes such as cutting, burning, grazing and turf-cutting, to preserve diversity of landscapes that are of high priority in Europe.