Prehistoric times span from the Palaeolithic (Stone Age) at 480,000 BP through to the Mesolithic, Neolithic, Bronze Ages and Iron Ages (just preceding Roman invasion). It is generally thought Britain was blanketed with woodland after the last glaciation, which began around 40,000 years BP during the Paleolithic period. Today, British people live in a landscape with greatly reduced woodland cover and a mosaic of different habitats such as the upland moorlands and lowland heath and grasslands.
The soils of Britain lie on bedrock laid down since the last glaciation, and their diversity is influenced by these foundations. Soil properties at a place at one time are partly determined also by the vegetation and organisms it supports (Avery, 1990). The current soils of Britain are shown in table 1.0.
Throughout England and lowland Wales, gley soils are present (mainly orthic or luvic, with associated brown soils). Pelo-calcaric brown or pelo-calcaric gley (calcareous clay) soils with associated brown and gley soils are distributed across central England reaching into the South West. Lowland areas of England and Wales contain brown soils, mainly luvic with associated gley soils.
Southern England downs (Wessex, South Downs), Gloucestershire, parts of Norfolk and east of the Pennines feature rendzinas or calcaric brown soils with associated brown luvic soils. Uplands of southern England, Wales, Pennines, parts of Lakes, southern and eastern Scotland contain brown soils, mainly sandy with associated rendzinas, podzols or gley soils. The highest peaks of Wales, the Pennines, north England, the Scottish Highlands and the Shetlands contain bog soils (blanket bog), stagnopodzols and humic (peaty) gley soils with associated rankers, lithosols and brown soils or podzols.
As vegetation and soil are intimately associated, Man's influence on the environment must therefore have affected soil dynamics and development. This report aims to give an overview of Man's impact on British soils during Prehistory, and if his activities assisted the development of the soils present today.