A line transect was made along an ecocline in a valley at Broadmoor Heath, nr. Bracknell (OS 843627). The gradient spanned from dry heath on gravels on the plateau down the slope to wet mire on peat above clay on the valley floor. Quadrats were sampled at various points along the line to determine the NVC communities along the gradient.
A 180 m line transect was positioned from the plateau to the valley floor. Attempts were made to identify distinct communities along the gradient by eye ad sample them using quadrats. Quadrat samples were made at various points along this line and species present were recorded.
Five main vegetation types appeared to occur along the valley slope down to the valley floor. Species are listed in table 1.0. The data was used to classify the communities present according to the National Vegetation Classification (Rodwell, 1991).
On the valley plateau, mature heather occurred on gravels. Podzols form a layer over the gravels, which persist down most of the slope until soil conditions become too wet. The plateau vegetation recorded was keyed out to H2 community (
At the top of the slope, the gravels disappear and sandy soil occurs, still underlying the podzol. This region also bears typical H2 vegetation, with generally more grasses and lichens and However,
Along the middle region of the slope, gleys replace the sand. This anaerobic environment encourages reduction of iron compounds by microorganisms in the soil. The community is now M16a (
Vegetation occurs on peat floating on clay soils at the bottom of the slope approaching the valley floor, keyed out to community M16.
On the valley floor, Vegetation keyed out to M21 ( Pools of water are frequent, although the classification of this community is uncertain due to being poorly described in the NVC.
Unfortunately, for each region there was not a minimum of five quadrats sampled. However, the results produced show a series of transition zones along an ecotone. This was especially apparent at the top of the slope, where H2 community occurred but with new species, not described in the NVC. There may be scope to divide H2 into sub communities, i.e. with or without Certain communities were not described in great detail, leading to difficulties in aligning them to NVC communities, e.g. whether pools of water at the bottom of the valley slope were classified as M29 or M30. M29 is apparently not present in the south east of Britain, and distribution of M30 is not really stated. As an incidental note, although not sampled, W4 (
The data shows a typical zonation around a lowland valley bog in southern England, as described by Rodwell (1991) in M21a section. Such ecolines comprise transitional communities, which are at times problematic to key out to NVC.