Silchester Common, Hampshire is situated on acid soils. The typical Nation Vegetation Classification H2 community is present, with Pteridium aquilinum occurring on sandy patches off the gravels. Surrounding woodland has Quercus patrea and hybrids of this species between Q. robur. Much Polytrichum commune moss present in the boggier areas. Sphagnum squarrosa, S. papillosum, Juncus squarrosa.
Succession in heather following burning. There are evident regions of succession, including old heather recovering from the fire. Red flint also indicates fire has happened. Thickness of white layer on flint is the 'leached layer', a measure of timethe flint has been exposed to air, and iron leached out of the rock. Heather can be aged by counting rings of a cut stem.
Distinct 'regions' of vegetational succession were identified by eye and sampled by five 2 m 2 quadrats. Average % cover of vascular and non-vascular plant species was estimated. To estimate the average age of Calluna heath in a 'region', the height and diameter of stalk base of the tallest Calluna stalk was measured in each quadrat.
Height of heather was based on average height of the tallest Calluna plant in each quadrat of a region. To calculate the age of Calluna in a region and therefore time of succession, the tallest stem was removed using secateurs and a transverse section made of the base of the stem, and the number of rings was counted under a microscope.
Table 1.0 contains the data for Calluna height and stem thickness and % cover of plant species in relation to age of Calluna.
Unfortunately only data for one quadrat could give information on % cover of heathland at 4 years after the fire incident. However, the data demonstrates a relatively clear secondary succession of heathland over a >20 year period since severe burning event.
Heath species were the most efficient plants at colonising the bare ground (pioneer stage of heather development) along with herbaceous plants, lichens and acrocarpous mosses However, from 5-15 years the heather is in its 'building' phase, and with gorse forms a continuous canopy > 50 cm shading out light underneath. The herbs, lichens and acrocarp mosses are out-competed due to lack of light. As the acrocarpous mosses decline, pleurocarpous mosses move in. During the 'mature' phase of heather at ~20 years, acrocarps appear for a second time as the more 'leggy' heather allows more light under the canopy, and replace the pleurocarps.
Heather species are dominant the whole way through this succession. The reason heather is so successful re-colonising is due to the coppicing effect burning has on the heather. Not only does the fire stimulate seed germination and promote seedling growth, it also encourages growth of new shoots from original plants that survived the fire.
However, when degenerate (>25 years), more light-demanding species will return, including tree species. If left unmanaged, succession would continue on to woodland. Managed burning maintains heathland, arresting the habitat at a stage in its natural succession. Heathland can be described as a plageoclimatic community.