Mr  arrived at  hospital's A &amp; E department by ambulance following a GP referral 8 days ago. He was subsequently transferred to  ward.
Mr  is a known asthmatic who is also likely to have a degree of COPD given his smoking history. The presenting history of increasing breathlessness, wheezing, cyanosis and sputum production strongly suggests a lower respiratory tract infection which has exacerbated his asthma/COPD symptoms. The fact that he is cyanosed indicates hypoxia and therefore Mr  is probably in respiratory failure. Although this is most likely to be due to the infection, physical examination and further investigations will be required before the exact cause can be determined. Physical examination will include a general exam and focused exams of the respiratory and cardiovascular systems. Further investigations such as blood tests (FBC, U&amp;E, LFT, CRP, arterial blood gas), CXR, ECG, PEFR and spirometry should also be carried out. These results will therefore be obtained if available.
Clinical signs such as pyrexia, dyspnoea and lung crackles were revealed during the physical examination which supports the diagnosis of a LRTI. A raised WCC and consolidation were also observed on the FBC and CXR respectively. A CURB score of 2 indicated a severe pneumonia (urea&gt;8mmol/l, RR&gt;30/min). The presence of tachycardia, tremor and significantly reduced oxygen saturation suggest that inadequate gas exchange is occurring as a result. This is reflected in the ABG results which show a type 1 pattern of respiratory failure (PO 2 &lt; 8kPa with normal pCO 2).
The ABG suggest  is suffering from acute respiratory acidaemia due to increased CO 2 retention. This would subsequently give rise to the noted tremor. As his condition has only deteriorated acutely no rise in CO 2 level has yet been observed, due to a compensatory use of the available HCO 3. HCO 3 has therefore fallen below the normal range. If inadequate ventilation were sustained, CO 2 levels would eventually rise, as would HCO 3 levels as a compensatory metabolic alkalosis developed.
As Mr  has no history of diabetes, the hyperglycaemia is probably a normal metabolic response to the severe demands currently placed upon his body. For example both infection and respiratory failure would promote secretion of glucagon, cortisol and catecholamines. It would however be important to follow this abnormal result up at a later date to ensure NIDDM can be excluded. The slightly raised urea and creatinine levels indicate a degree of renal failure however this would be expected in such an elderly patient, especially when an underlying infection is present. The ECG and CK didn't suggest a cardiac origin for his symptoms. The occasional chest pain is therefore either musculoskeletal due to the increased respiratory effort, or respiratory in origin.
Mr  has developed a severe community acquired pneumonia which has led to type 1 respiratory failure and an acute respiratory acidosis. He was also found to be hyperglycaemic. Despite his age,  could previously lead quite an independent life albeit with some occasional support from his son and care workers. His recent illness is therefore likely to have a significant impact upon his psychological well being as his mobility has been severely limited. In addition, any deterioration in his previous health status will have a knock-on effect on his ability to support his daughter which may cause distress to both parties.
Mr  was followed up eight days after admission. On examination he was sat up comfortably in a chair. There was a purple seretide inhaler, volumatic spacer and a sputum pot containing a teaspoon of green sputum present on the bedside table.  was using oxygen (1.5L/min via nasal cannula), however despite his dyspnoea, there was no sign of tachypnoea (RR=12/min). He was no longer tachycardic (HR 82bpm) and his BM had fallen to 7.0. There was still some evidence of peripheral cyanosis and a few fine crackles detected at the lung bases. Mr  reported a noticeable improvement in his condition. He had also been switched to a two week course of oral antibiotics (amoxicillin 500mg PO td and clarithromycin 500mg PO bd).
Despite the improvement in his medical condition, Mr  was still suffering from a significantly reduced level of mobility. He was only able to walk a maximum of 4 metres using a frame with assistance.  reported that this was due to weakness in the legs rather than exertional breathlessness, and therefore he had started to receive daily rehab with the physiotherapist. He was also requiring assistance with washing and dressing. It would be important to ensure that a suitable home care package was arranged prior to his discharge which included daily follow-up with a physiotherapist. Discharge to a temporary care home should also be considered depending upon his progress.
Severe CAP is a life-threatening condition defined by the presence of respiratory failure or symptoms of severe sepsis or septic shock. It accounts for approximately 10% of hospitalized patients with CAP. The majority of patients with severe pneumonia have underlying co-morbid illnesses, with COPD, alcoholism, chronic heart disease, and diabetes mellitus being the most frequent. S. pneumoniae, Legionella spp, H. influenzae, S. aureus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, respiratory viruses (especially influenza viruses), and P. aeruginosa represent the most important causative organisms of severe CAP. Rapid initiation of appropriate antimicrobial treatment is crucial for a favourable outcome. Initial antimicrobial treatment should be based on an empirical approach. Microbial investigation may be helpful in the individual case but is probably more useful to define local antimicrobial policies based on local epidemiologic and susceptibility patterns. Mortality rates range from 21% to 54%. The most important prognostic factors include general health state of the patient, appropriateness of initial antimicrobial treatment and the existence of bacteraemia, as well as factors reflecting severe respiratory failure, severe sepsis, septic hypotension or shock, and the extent of infiltrates in chest radiograph. Initial antimicrobial treatment should consist of a second (or third) generation cephalosporin and erythromycin. (Ewig &amp; Torres, 1999)
It is possible to manage the majority of episodes of acute respiratory failure with mechanical ventilation administered with non-invasive techniques, however the use of endotracheal intubation usually results in a poor prognosis i.e. one year survival rate is usually lower than 40% (Braghiroli, 1997).
This case has provided the opportunity to study the diagnosis, investigation and management of respiratory failure. It has also highlighted the importance of determining the underlying cause and need to address the various psychological and social implications which may arise in patients whose respiratory function deteriorates acutely.