A company needs to be aware of its external environment as the forces within the environment will affect the company and its business strategies. Understanding the environment helps the organization to identify key issues and ways of coping with change and complexity.
According to the square onion diagram, the external environment can be divided into macro-environment and industry. The macro-environment consists of broad environment factors which influence the organisation and the success and failure of strategies. Those factors includes political, economic, social, technological, environmental and legal environment (PESTEL). The industry is a group of organisations producing the same products or services including potential entrants, competitors, customers, suppliers and substitutes (Five Forces). Analysing the industry enables the organisation to know its position and improve its position relative to competitors.
Knowing the strategic choices is important for a business unit looking to achieve advantage. The strategy clock is the competitive strategy options for the SBU. Most company will attain competitive advantage through price and differentiation.
Tesco is in route 3 of the strategic clock which is a hybrid strategy.
It seeks simultaneously to achieve differentiation and a price lower than that of competitors.
Differentiates itself to provide large range of goods and services: grocery, non-food including electrical, stationary, clothing etc. and retailing services such as financial services, insurance and telecommunications packages.
Has various own brands, from Value to Finest and lifestyle ranges like Organic, Free From and Healthy Living to enable customers to buy products to compliment their lifestyle
(Source: Tesco plc).
Continually innovating and investing in new lines to increase choice for customers
(Source: Tesco plc).
Compares price with other competitors by price check (Source: Tesco.com) and posters in store to show that it offers a lower price.
Tesco always need to understand competitiors, segments operating/target in and what customers in that segment value in order to succeed.
Some rivals are in the same position while some are in different position on the strategy clock as Tesco.
Asda is also in route 3 as it provides large range of food, non-food products and retail services such as financial services and travel. So it is a great competitor of Tesco.
Sainsbury's is in route 5 on the strategy clock. It also differentiates itself in providing both food, non-food and retail services such as Sainsbury's property and Sainsbury's bank, but of slightly higher price (Source: J Sainsbury plc).
Morrisons is in route 2 on the strategy clock. Its strategy is on selling predominantly food, at low prices, and doing so only from large stores (Source: Morrisons).
Tesco has changed position on the strategy clock over time.
Was started in route 1 in 1920-60s as it aimed to sell large volume of products at a very low price. Tesco only sold grocery products in the beginning.
Moved up to route 2 in 1970-80s as it opened its first petrol stations to have a bit more differentiation and introduce price-cutting campaign.
In 1990s-present, Tesco moved up to route 3 to provide a wide ranges of products and services.
(Source: Tesco plc)
Tesco's competitors are Asda, Sainsbury's, Morrisons, Marks and Spencer and Waitrose
From perceptual map,
Tesco and Asda both offer a wide range of products including groceries and retail services at a very low price.
Sainsbury has slightly less product range and products are higher in price.
Morrisons offer a low price but only sell food.
Marks & Spencer only sell own-brand food and clothing at a high price
Waitrose's products are at high price and mainly sell food.
Supermarkets can differentiate themselves base on marketing, products and/or resources.
Tesco differentiate itself base on all marketing, products and competences/resources.
Marketing based:
Organised online order system through Tesco.com
Corporate social responsibility by reducing emissions from our transport distribution and refrigerant used (Source: Tesco plc).
Introduce GI labelling on food products.
Product based:
Offers various own-brand products---Value, Healthy Living, Finest, Organic, 'Free From' and Fairtrade.
Competence/resource based:
It has a strong and stable core as it has long history and accumulated experience.
Has knowledge of what customers value by building a complete data base through Tesco Clubcard scheme.
Large number of workforce available.
It is important that Tesco can sustain its competitive advantages.
Sustaining low price competitive advantage is very difficult. Tesco has economy of scale and can buy in and produce high volume of products at once as it has lots of customers. This leads to a low cost base and being the cost leader. However, it is easily to loss tightness with customers of knowing what they need and value.
Sustaining differentiation requires a company to have core competences that cannot be copied. It is crucial that Tesco can give customers what they want and able to move around the strategy clock. Differentiation which provide wider range of products so that customers can take away their eyes on price.
Tesco has taken product development which offers new products or services like non-food, finance, insurance and telecoms as well as groceries to existing customers.
As Tesco has existing data base, it is easy for them to understand their customers' and follow the changing needs of them by introducing new services and products.
Expand product range by launching own-brand Value, Healthy Living, Organic, Finest, 'Free-From' products and Fairtrade range. (Source: Tesco plc)
Partnership between Clubcard and AIRMILES to introduce new use of Clubcard points.
(Source: Business To Business Travel Websites Group)
Tesco has also taken market development as to target new customers and niche.
Launches Tesco.com to sell products through internet to target those customers who do not have cars, do not have time to go shopping and buy large volume at one time.
Has pushed into 11 other countries in Europe and Asia and focus on giving local customers what they want.
Partnership with eDietsUK to launch 'Tesco Diets' which provides nutrition and healthy diets advice online to target segment who aware of weight and want to loss weight.(Source: Tesco Diets)
Methods of development used to achieve the chosen development directions are internal development (develop new products in different own-brand ranges and new markets with the use of its existing data base) and partnerships (to pull resources together and explore new possibilities).
Tesco's development directions are the same as Carrefour or Wal-Mart.
Carrefour also sells a wide variety of goods in addition to food and sells own-brand products. it intends to increase the range of products (product development)
Expanding its operations aboard into 28 countries (market development)
Wal-Mart offers food, non-food such as books and electronics and retail services such as financial services and vacations (market development). (Source: Wal-Mart Stores)
Operates in 14 other countries in different parts of the world (market development).
(Source: Wal-Mart Stores)
There are three success criteria by which strategies should be judged: suitability, acceptability and feasibility. These criteria can also be used explicitly to evaluate strategies as part of a process of strategy selection.
Suitability is concerned with whether the strategies address the circumstances in which an organization is operating - the strategic options. How suitable, logical and likely are they to work.
Acceptability is concerned with the performance outcomes/results of the strategies.
Feasibility is concerned with how practical are those strategies and whether the organization has the resources/competences to deliver the strategies.
To assess acceptability and feasibility, Tesco might use:
Profitability analysis to understand the financial return of investing new products and markets
Both financial and non-financial cost benefits
Shareholder value analysis to impact of new strategies on shareholder value and to provide a quick look at the acceptability.
Risk facing in purchasing a particular strategy as this will affect the growth.
Stakeholder reactions to understand political dimension of strategy. Stakeholders are important to Tesco, it will be useful to understand the likely reactions of stakeholders to new strategies, the ability to manage those reactions and hence the acceptability of a strategy.
Funds flow forecasting to identify the finance required and available, e.g. the amount of money needed for Tesco to buy in and invest new products.
Identification of resources and competences required for the strategies.
Tesco has been so successful in the UK market as it offers large range of products at low price. Its Clubcard Scheme which award customers with cash coupons attract customers to shop again.