Sensory profiling, also known as descriptive analysis, is a method to identify, define and quantify the intensity of different sensory characteristics that can be identified in a set of food products. It is a process in which 8-12 trained panelists detect and describe both the qualitative and quantitative attributes contributing to the sensory characteristics of the food. The application of sensory profiling enables comparison of the major sensory differences between food samples.
Other than price, sensory quality is also an important issue for deciding which food products to purchase. That is why sensory analysis is vital to evaluate and improve the food quality. This practical aims at introducing the techniques and procedures of sensory profiling. Also, to assess four different brands of milk chocolate to develop a sensory profile and to find out how and why those chocolates are different.
It was a 2-3 stages process to profile the sensory attributes of milk chocolate.
Samples: 4 different brands of milk chocolate: Asda, Cadbury's Dairy Milk, Galaxy, Waitrose Belgian Milk
(Assessors did not know the brands until the whole experiment finished.)
Two-way ANOVA was used to show statistically which attributes differ between samples and the variability between assessors. The data results in a 3-way table crossing assessors, samples and attributes. The data analysed could be directed to describe either the assessors' performances or the sample differences.
Guinard and Mazzucchelli, 1999 evaluated the sensory properties of nine milk chocolates by descriptive analysis with a panel of 18 trained judges. They discovered the effects of sugar and fat on the texture, mouthfeel and flavour of milk chocolate. Low-sugar samples were bitter, gritty and roasted (p < 0.001). High-sugar samples had higher milky/dairy, vanilla/caramel, hardness and sweetness intensities (p < 0.001). Samples higher in fat were faster melting. Low-sugar and low-fat samples were associated with viscous, mouthcoating, fatty/oily, cocoa and darker notes. Samples with high levels of both sugar and fat were more cooling and faster vanishing (p < 0.001).
Through sensory profiling, the attributes of milk chocolates were profiled and scored. Differences among 4 milk chocolates, samples and assessors variability could be evaluated. Sensory profiling is useful in new product development, quality control, shelf life assessments and benchmarking product sensory characteristics against competitor products. It is more complete and informative than physical and chemical methods, e.g. gas chromatography to evaluate coffee flavour. (Bucking and Steinhart, 2002).
There were 23 attributes being evaluated.
96 observations (12 assessors  4 samples  2 replicates) were made for each attribute,
i.e. 24 observations for each attribute of each sample.