Mr  was referred to the accident and emergency department after presenting at an NHS walk-in clinic.
Given the history of acute onset pain and paraesthesiae in an extremity, the most likely cause for 's presentation is acute limb ischaemia. This condition typically presents with six classic features (6P's), which include pain, paraesthesiae, pallor, pulselessness, perishingly cold and paralysis (due to nerve damage) and therefore additional signs should be sought upon physical examination. Acute ischaemia occurs due to sudden arterial occlusion and can arise as a result of thrombosis in situ, embolism, graft occlusion or occasionally trauma. Some of the conditions which may lead to emboli or thrombus formation are shown below (McLatchie and Leaper al, 2002):
In the case of Mr  there were several important features elicited from the history which may have predisposed him to vascular disease. These included a history of smoking, rheumatic fever and previous vascular disease. A history of intermittent claudication is also common in patients presenting with acute ischaemia, however its absence does not impact upon the diagnosis. There were no features in the history to suggest additional causes of acute onset pain such as trauma or a DVT. DVT is unlikely given that there was no history of swelling, recent surgery/travel, fever, redness or tachycardia. There were no features in the history to suggest a recent myocardial infarction. There was no history of Raynaud's syndrome.
Given the history of previous vascular problems, the physical examination will focus upon the peripheral vascular system. A general examination will also be performed in order to elicit any systemic signs which may indicate cardiovascular disease.
Obtained from admission notes:
Further signs indicating acute ischaemia were elicited upon physical examination such as cool extremities, pallor and the absence of distal peripheral pulses in the right leg. There was also delayed capillary refill on the right suggesting poor peripheral perfusion. Given that the right popliteal pulse was absent and there was no radio-femoral delay, the most likely most position for the arterial obstruction is in the superior femoral artery. Although clinically it is difficult to determine the precise cause for a thrombo-embolic event, some features of the history can be used to help differentiate between embolism and thrombosis. These are summarised below with significant findings highlighted in bold (Handa et al, 2000):
The above guidelines therefore suggest that Mr 's ischaemia was most likely due to an embolic event. The fact that capillary refill occurred, albeit delayed, in the right foot suggests that either the obstruction was incomplete or that some collaterals were available in order to maintain perfusion. Although it is impossible to determine the precise cause of the emboli without further investigation, there was no evidence to suggest the presence of atrial fibrillation or an abdominal aortic aneurysm.
Mr  is suffering from acute limb ischaemia as a result of a thrombo-embolic event. This condition represents an acute medical emergency which may require urgent angioplasty, embolectomy (using a fogarty catheter) or open surgery, and as a result Mr  is likely to be placed under a considerable amount of stress. In addition, there is also the danger that amputation may be required if the limb is not viable or becomes gangrenous. Given this scenario, there would obviously be the potential for significant psychological and social issues to arise. For example amputation may have a substantial impact upon his mental health, his ability to maintain previous social interactions and employment.
Following admission Mr  remained in hospital for eight days under observation. During this time he continued on IVI heparin for several days, until being transferred to oral warfarin. No immediate surgical intervention was necessary and there were no signs to indicate that his foot had suffered any irreversible damage as a result of the ischaemia. Mr  reported that he had not suffered from any pain or paraesthesiae since the heparin was started and his OBS had been stable through his admission. After being transferred to warfarin his INR, APTT and PT levels were closely monitored until appropriate levels for discharge had been achieved. Prior to discharge levels of INR = 2.0, PT = 21 and APTTR = 1.2 were achieved indicating a stable anti-coagulated state. Although there is still some debate as to whether long-term anticoagulation is beneficial in these patients, it would be important to keep Mr  on warfarin in the short-term, at least until he can be reviewed in clinic. At this stage further decisions could be made regarding the need for elective surgery to improve the arterial supply.
A recent Cochrane review compared the use of surgery with thrombolysis to determine the best initial management for acute limb ischaemia. It found that there was not enough evidence to support initial thrombolysis rather than initial surgery. It did however highlight the fact that thrombolysis may be associated with a higher risk of continued limb ischaemia and haemorrhagic complications (i.e. stroke), but then this risk of complications must be balanced against risks of surgery in individuals. In addition, there was no overall difference in the rates of limb salvage or death at one year between initial surgery and initial thrombolysis. The report therefore concluded that universal guidelines for initial treatment with either surgery or thrombolysis cannot be advocated based on the available evidence.
Following successful reperfusion, there is still some debate regarding whether long-term anticoagulation is beneficial in patients such as  who are not suffering from AF. For example Campbell et al (2000) suggest that long-term oral anticoagulation is associated with reduced risk of recurrent limb ischaemia and amputation, however they admit that more research is needed to define the specific benefits and risks. In contrast, a further report suggested that patients without AF or a cardiac thrombus may not be at the same risk for recurrent events as those with these risk factors, and that therefore long-term anticoagulant therapy may not be as necessary in this group (Forbes et al, 2003). It therefore appears that the choice to use of long-term anticoagulants remains at discretion of treating physician.
The prevalence of acute leg ischaemia is approximately 1 in 12,000 patients per year (Tidy, 2004).
In England and Wales approximately 5000 patients present each year, and the associated mortality is at least 20%, with a limb loss rate of 40%. Mortality is generally higher in patients presenting with embolic causes, while limb loss is higher in those with thrombosis. The majority of acute limb ischaemia is caused by acute thrombosis in a vessel with pre-existing atherosclerosis (60%) whilst embolism accounts for a further 30% of acutely ischaemic limbs. Most emboli (80%) have a cardiac cause and arise from the left atrium in patients with atrial fibrillation or following acute myocardial infarction. Less common cardiac sources include prosthetic valves, valve vegetations in endocarditis, "paradoxical" embolus and atrial myxoma. Arterial aneurysms account for a further 10% of emboli and may be in the aortic, iliac, femoral, popliteal, or subclavian arteries (Hickey et al, 1990).
This case has provided to the opportunity to review the typical presentation and treatment of an acutely ischaemic limb. It has also highlighted the severity of the situation and the importance of prompt diagnosis and treatment in order to avoid the need for amputation. Speed is essential as complete acute limb ischaemia will lead to irreversible tissue damage within 6 hours unless the limb is revascularised, therefore it is also important that senior help is called for early on as this may lead to improved limb salvage and survival. It allowed the various types of surgical intervention, such embolectomy, to be studied.