Marks and Spencer were founded through the partnership of Michael Marks and Tom Spencer. Simon Marks took over M&S and the company was hugely successful in terms of profit and market share. Richard Greenbury became the CEO of M&S from 1991 and the company continued to make a success until the late 1990s.
The concept of culture web is a representation of the paradigm (taken-for-granted assumptions) of an organisation and the physical manifestations of organizational culture. The cultural web provides wider aspects of the organisation as to give clues about the paradigm and to reinforce the assumptions within the paradigm. It can be used as a way of understanding current organizational culture and desired future culture. The cultural web is a useful way of considering the cultural context for change.
The elements of the cultural web are rituals and routines, stories, symbols, power structures, organizational structures and control systems.
Rituals and routines------Rituals are about organization events through which the organisation emphasizes what is particularly important. Routines are how members of the organisation behave towards each other and towards those outside the organisation.
Stories-----------------------Stories and myths told by members of the organisation to each other, to outsiders and to new recruits which embed the present in its organisational history.
Symbols---------------------Such as logos, offices, cars and titles or the type of language and terminology commonly used become a shorthand representation of the nature of the organisation.
Power structure------------It is about how power distributed in the organisation. The most powerful groupings within the organisation are likely to be closely related to the assumptions and paradigm.
Organisational structure------Outline important relationships and emphasise what is important in the organisation. It can reflect the power structure and show how decisions flow.
Control systems-----------Measurements and reward systems emphasise what is important to monitor in the organisation and to focus attention and activity upon.
The assumption which constitute the paradigm reflect the common public perception that M&S is traditional, old-fashioned and lack of innovations as it always emphasis and launch classic style clothing without any fashionable design. Also stories about M&S products were not attractive meant its products were not up-to-fashion and not innovative.
M&S products were seen as of high quality as it launched the 'St Michael' logo to prove the quality and always use the same suppliers to ensure quality.
All the organizational structure, control systems and board room meeting made M&S being percept as an organisation which emphasis on organisational structure.
Sometimes there is a tendency towards inertia and resistance to change. People will tend to hold on to existing ways of doing things and existing beliefs about what makes sense. Managing strategic change must therefore address the powerful influence of the paradigm and the cultural web on the strategy being followed by the organisation.
If change is to be successful it also has to link the strategic and the operational and everyday aspects of the organisation. Managers need to consider how to balance the different approaches to managing strategic change according to the circumstances they face.
Different 'levers' can be employed to manage strategic change. Levers include the importance of changes in structure and control, the need to change organizational routines and symbols and the importance of political processes, communication and other change tactics.
Structural and control-----These aspects of change tend to position top managers as controllers of change with organizational members responding to the systems they install.
Routines---They are the organizationally specific 'ways we do things around here' which tend to persist over time and guide people's behaviour.
Symbolic processes------Changes in everyday things which are nevertheless especially meaningful in the context of a particular situation or organisation. Symbols can be objects, events, acts or people which express more than their intrinsic content.
Political processes---------There may be a need for the reconfiguration of power structures in the organisation to build a power base, encourage support or overcome resistance and achieve commitment to a strategy or course of action.
Communication------------It is important to communicate with members of the organisation understand the need for change, what it is intended to achieve or what is involved in the changes.
Change tatics---------------Including timing, job losses and de-layering and strategies which can be put in place and to be successful quickly.
M&S used different levers at different time periods and with different CEOs.
Luc Vandevelde was appointed as the new CEO of M&S in January 2000. Between January to May 2000, he used routines, symbolic processes, political processes, communication and change tatics to try to bring about change.
However, sales remained unchanged as in 1999 and a fall in profit of New measures and strategies implemented did not make any visible improvement. The clothing range performance remained bad and there were lots of excess stock. Thus Vandevelde implemented new strategy and chose different levers to try to bring about change after May 2000.
Vandevelde's performance was praised by shareholders. The new women's range 'Per Una', 'Perfect' range and washable suit were greatly received by customers and performed well. M&S reported better trading figures and a rise in share price in October 2001.
Roger Holmes was employed to be M&S's head of UK retailing in late 2001 and was promoted to CEO in July 2002 after Vandevelde resignation. He made use of structure and control, routines, symbolic processes, political processes and change tatics.
Under Holmes effort,
Sales had risen 6.7% on Christmas trading period 2002 which outperform most of its competitors but full cost was 5% higher than previous year.
Back in the rankings of the 'World's Most Respected Companies'.
Won a Queens Award for Enterprise for its washable suit which had been on sale since 2001.
A rise in profits and an increase to the dividend was reported in the end of year figures for 2002.
Success of its '&more' card and so regained customer trust.
Holmes was blamed as being too nice and took too long to make decisions.
Simply food stores performed better than main stores for sales per foot.
Home division started having problems and underperformed.
Performance in children's and women's clothing continued to be a problem and lost market share.
Failed to make an impression on the culture and did not manage to change the bureaucracy.