In approaching this question I shall be focusing on the issue of instruction and I feel that this is a particularly central issue with regards my experience of learning Persian. This was not an ideal learning experience, and I shall examine what instruction was missing from it and what instruction would have helped to make it more successful. I shall examine therefore, how instruction affected my learning experience. There are several different methods of instruction, all of which focus on a particular area of language learning theory and suggest particular methods of teaching, some more controversial than others. By focusing on instruction, I will be looking at what I was getting from the environment, that is to say, from the Persian coursebook and tape. Hence, my aim here is to conclude which language learning theory (or theories) the Persian coursebook and tape is most closely focused on, the limitations and benefits of these theories and what would have enhanced my learning experience.
I will examine here the type of instruction received. A fuller analysis of the coursebook can be found in appendix 1.
According to Spolsky (1990: 2), 'any theory of second language learning that leads to a single method is obviously wrong' and methods which support a single theory can only be correct 'with certain interpretations under certain conditions' (1990: 4). Spolsky therefore devised a general theory of second language learning comprising six necessary conditions which a learner needs to be able to learn a L2. I will focus on these six conditions when assessing what was missing from my language learning experience. They are as follows:
Analysis: Learners need to be able to break down and analyse a language.
Recombination: Learners must be able to take elements learnt and put them together in different ways. This is more difficult for beginners, particularly in informal situations.
Contextual embedding: Learners need to see how things work in a context and how items learnt fit into a bigger picture. Isolated pieces of grammar and vocabulary are not very beneficial to the learner.
Matching: Learners need to match what they are producing against some kind of target, such as a native speaker. This allows them to hear discrepancies and overcome differences in production.
Memory: The ability to retain things is an important part of learning a language.
Practice: Repeated output is needed in order to achieve a certain level of fluency.
(Spolsky 1990)
Of course, some things are more difficult to teach, such as accent and intonation, but all of the above conditions can be enhanced through formal (classroom) or informal (natural) instruction. In a natural learning environment, the conditions of matching, recombination and contextual embedding will dominate (Spolsky 1990). In a classroom environment, these conditions will be present, but not so predominantly, because there will be less native speakers (usually only the teacher), limited recombination as the teacher chooses the focus, and contextual embedding will usually have to be imagined in tasks (Spolsky 1990). However, in formal instruction the condition of analysis dominates as there is often some focus on form, even in communicative approaches.
Using Spolsky's general theory of language learning it is possible to see what aspects were missing from my experience of learning Persian Whilst there was an attempt at analysis in the coursebook, Spolsky's first necessary condition, there was a tendency for whole structures to be taught, with some analysis but no complete breakdown of structures. This made recombination difficult, stressful and frustrating. Hence, Spolsky's second condition could not be fully met. Greater thought was needed to contextualise the material, and so the third condition was not fully met either. I have also already made mention of the pronunciation difficulties which arose and whilst the cassette was used for the dialogues, it was not used extensively, especially when other new vocabulary was introduced. As a beginner, greater use of the cassette in the course would have given a target to focus on and Spolsky's fourth condition of matching would have been more fully met. Finally, as already suggested, there were not enough exercises focusing on the practice of new forms and so I was not confident in using them or new vocabulary. A greater focus on this condition (number six), perhaps making use of the cassette, would have also helped with Spolsky's fifth condition of memory. So whilst the coursebook does show elements of Spolsky's six necessary conditions, it does not meet them fully and therefore there were limitations in the success of the instruction received.
The Persian coursebook is not based on Spolsky's general theory, but is most likely closely linked to ideas of instruction based on one (or more) theories of second language learning. Form-focused instruction refers to 'any planned or incidental instructional activity that is intended to induce language learners to pay attention to linguistic form' (Ellis 2001:1-2). Having examined a general theory of what is necessary in order to learn a L2, I will now examine three principal types of form-focused instruction, and an example of second language teaching theory relevant to each type.
As a result of this examination of three types of instruction, each based on a different theory of language learning, I can now view my Persian learning in a more informed light. On the surface it appears to focus on meaning because it is organised by topic and aims to teach colloquial Persian, including culture, with little focus on the written language. However, in the focus on meaning method of instruction, emphasis is on comprehensible input, which was not the main method of the coursebook. The dialogues in each lesson were a way of introducing new raw data for the learner, and so in this way, one might conclude that instruction focuses on form. However, in the coursebook, instruction of forms is pre-planned, suggesting a focus on forms approach to teaching. So, upon closer analysis it becomes clear that generally speaking, the coursebook used focuses on forms.
Each lesson has a clear grammatical item or structure as its central core and some of the exercises used are similar to those highlighted by Johnson (1996) such as fill in the gap exercises. However, Johnson's method stresses the importance of a balance between declarative knowledge, prominent in the coursebook, and procedural knowledge, which is the coursebook's weak point. There is little attempt at progressive form defocus in the exercises enabling confident use of structures. This lack of emphasis on proceduralization is, I believe, the course's biggest failing. Had exercises been less rushed, declarative knowledge would have been developed and new information activated. More time spent practising would have led to forms being proceduralised and the inclusion of production, perhaps by making greater use of the cassette, would have enhanced the learning experience. The micro-session with the Persian native speaker was extremely helpful for this exact reason, as it prepared students for real world communication, and because it allowed learners to match their production against a native speaker, which is Spolsky's fourth necessary condition for successful second language learning. The micro-teaching sessions also acted as revision sessions, which stopped each lesson from becoming an isolated unit of work.
A strong point of the course is that it does not allow declarative knowledge to disappear, a point which Johnson (1996) stresses to be important. Exercises introduce new verbs and vocabulary so students have to draw on declarative knowledge in order to complete the exercises. However, theses types of exercises should come after a greater number of practice exercises, in order for some proceduralization to have taken place. Similarly, paradigms and structures should be broken down and analysed in greater depth in order for the student to be able to call on their declarative knowledge when asked to do exercises which ask them to recombine knowledge and form new sentences. Spolsky (1990) also emphasised the importance of analysis and recombination in successful language learning.
Whilst Rafiee (2005) does explicitly present the grammar, it is not explicitly taught through the exercises and cassette tape. Greater focus on practice, important for successful language learning according to Spolsky (1990), and production using the available materials (especially the cassette) would also have improved the success of the course and led to improved automatisation according to Johnson (1996). In the focus on meaning approach, presentation of a rule is enough and there is no need for it to be explicitly taught, but here, instruction focuses on forms and presentation is not sufficient. The aim of this course is to communicate successfully in Persian, but there is in fact very little practice at communicating and pronunciation errors may fossilise.
Many questions remain to be asked about the issue of instruction in second language teaching, which I have not addressed here. Studies investigating whether or not instruction can alter the course of second language acquisition, the effect of instruction on second language acquisition (see Harley 1988 for a more detailed discussion) and whether instruction can make a difference (see Long 1983) have often concluded that instruction is beneficial. Similarly, research into what types of instruction are the most beneficial is still ongoing. However, more research is needed in this broad area in order to really reach a conclusion about the benefits or otherwise of formal instruction and answering these questions is not the aim here.
The type of instruction received in the Persian coursebook had its limitations, and by relating this to theories, this explains the difficulties faced in my language learning experience. The instruction in my learning experience focuses largely on a focus on forms method, but also in part focuses on meaning because the overall aim of the course is verbal communication in colloquial Persian. Whilst Spolsky (1990) writes that a theory should not focus on one method, I think that as a beginner learning Persian, the hardest thing was that lessons appeared to focus on two methods: focus on meaning and focus on forms. Concentrating on two very different methods makes it difficult for a learner to concentrate both on meaning and on forms, particularly when learning a language so very different from any they have met before. Difficulties also arose because of the emphasis on declarative knowledge and the neglect at transforming this knowledge into procedural knowledge. Explicit focus on forms which is declarative biased does not lead to acquisition according to Johnson's DECPRO model (1996) and based on my Persian language learning experience I would be inclined to agree.