Mr  was initially referred to the colorectal clinic by his GP. He was met for the first time as an inpatient at the  Hospital whilst awaiting elective surgery.
Given the age of this patient and the history of PR bleeding, weight loss and a recent change of bowel habit, the most likely cause for this presentation is colorectal carcinoma. More specifically these symptoms suggest a left sided lesion. This is in contrast to the classical symptoms of a right-sided lesion which include anaemia, weight loss and a palpable mass. There was nothing in the history to suggest obstruction, perforation or fistula formation had occurred as a result. Other important differential diagnoses to consider would include chronic diverticular disease and diarrhoea resulting from infectious causes such as food poisoning (Salmonella), dysentery or viral enterocolitis. However as the symptoms, particularly PR bleeding, had persisted for nearly six weeks an infective cause seems quite unlikely. Medical causes such as excessive use of levothyroxine could also be responsible for his weight loss and diarrhoea however this would not cause rectal bleeding.
Upon physical examination a focused abdominal examination will be carried out to look for specific signs such as abdominal tenderness or palpable masses. A rectal exam will also be performed to confirm the PR bleeding. In addition PR masses can be detected in 60% of right sided carcinomas (Longmore et al, 2004). A general examination should also be performed to look for relevant systemic signs such as anaemia, and to allow the patient's general health to be assessed.
The physical examination did not reveal any clinical signs which suggested that Mr  was systemically unwell. There was some finger clubbing present although this may have been congenital and therefore with hindsight this should have been queried further. There was no pain or palpable masses on abdominal exam, however these symptoms rarely occur in left-sided carcinoma unless the patient presents late or obstruction has occurred. Although tenderness in the LIF is usually present in chronic diverticular disease, this still remains an important differential at this stage which would require further investigation before being excluded. However given the history of associated weight loss, left-sided colorectal carcinoma remains the most likely cause of Mr 's problems.
Mr  is a seventy-eight year old man who is most likely suffering from a left-sided colorectal carcinoma. Chronic diverticular disease still remains a possible differential diagnosis at this stage, however this could easily be clarified by performing further imaging investigations. Although Mr  also suffers from NIDDM and hypothyroidism, these have both been successfully controlled by medication, therefore he is otherwise fit and well and able to maintain a fully independent lifestyle. Receiving a diagnosis of cancer may therefore have a significant impact upon his psychosocial well-being. He currently lives with his elderly wife and has no other family in the area, therefore it is important to consider that he may require additional care assistance if his health deteriorates further or his condition becomes terminal.
At present there is considerable debate regarding means of preventing of colorectal carcinoma and the benefits of introducing a national screening programme.
FH: No relatives 1:50, 1x 1st degree 1:17, 2x 1st degree 1:6
This case has provided an opportunity to study various aspects of colorectal cancer including: