The inaugural speech of an American President has been described as the Its key goal is to demonstrate leadership and authority and it is this social and cultural function which provides a context in which language choice may change little over centuries. The familiar expression This paper will examine how the solidarity initiated by this use of
The aim of this paper is linguistic. I will examine the use of
to investigate American Presidents' promotion of solidarity through their choices in the use of the pronoun
Have American Presidents changed their use of the personal pronoun If so, what theoretical evidence is there to explain any change?
The methodology used is that of corpus linguistics. I have built two corpora by downloading 24 inaugural speeches made by 15 different presidents from George Washington's first inaugural speech in 1789 to George W Bush's second inaugural speech in 2005 (Bartleby.Com 2001). These will be referred to as Group 1 and Group 2 as indicated in the following tables and provide two corpora of about 23000 words each.
Group 1
Group 2
These presidencies are used because they represent the institution of the presidency from the two most distant groups in terms of time and they are limited to two groups of twelve because of space restrictions. The Group 1 speeches were made at a time of nation building during the years following the War of Independence and the Group 2 ones proceed through a period of world change and growth of the power of the United States.
The data has been tagged showing the use of
Concapp concordance software has been used as it allows the identification of all instances of the use of a word and displays that word in its co-text. Antconc concordance software has been used for the creation of a list of keywords indicating keyness by showing which words display particular significance in a given discourse relative to another.
The political process is essentially an ideological process and its discourse provides that ideology its expression (van Dijk 2004). The relationship between language and ideology is one of expressing assumptions which presume to describe what the world is like and, in political discourse particularly, in testing
Stubbs (1996) says:
The underlining has been added to provide a link between Stubbs' use of
Further to Stubbs' reference to context Van Dijk (2004) points out that the use of the pronoun He says that style of political discourse, including choice of pronoun, depends on situational context following in the tradition of Firth's (1935) contextual theory of meaning.
Firth's major principle of this theory is described by Stubbs (1996:53):
Halliday (1973:49) talks of
In this paper the wider context of political discourse is narrowed to a speech given at a particular time - the beginning of a new presidential term - or its temporal context. It brings into focus the cultural context, that is the range of potential possibilities of language choice and shows the actual choice among those possibilities within its situational context, that is the first rhetorical act of a new or returning leader whose aim is to assert his power and authority after a usually long and often bitter election campaign.
In confirming my introductory contention that However, Group 2 also used the more patriotic term Overall the use of
The Brown corpus data has been used to highlight the frequency of the use of these terms making them a feature of the type of discourse being analysed.
The Brown Corpus is American and contains 1 million words. There is only one use of As previously noted Groups 1 and 2 corpora consist of 23,000 words each making the comparison with the 1 million word Brown Corpus highly significant.
Antconc and a stoplist which eliminates function words showed that for Group 1 Group 1 used '
The keyword facility in Antconc determined that This figure shows that the keyness of
Exploring this further, and following the introductory remarks concerning the perception of solidarity initiated by the early use of
The following table displays those results.
This table shows that the Group 2 presidents used ' Group 2 used
The figures show that although the two groups use '
Fairclough (1989) refers to
For example, as I have indicated through the use of bracketing in the following extract from speech 31.1, it is Lyndon Baines Johnson's choice to use
The concept of a contextual theory of meaning helps to explain the change in use of Group 1 Presidents' speeches were made during the years 1789 to 1833 and Group 2 from 1961 to 2005. In terms of population growth between these two time-frames there has been significant change. The temporal context has not changed as the speeches maintain their position in tradition as a new or retuning president's demonstration of leadership and authority. More significant is the presidents increasing accessibility to their audience. Inaugural speeches are now broadcast into people's homes and the perception of solidarity has become more tangible. This is reflected in the significant increase in the use of
While showing there has been a significant shift in the use of the personal pronoun The use of corpus linguistics allows observance of things otherwise unobservable because software can highlight frequencies and statistics in large amounts of texts. Here the number of speeches included in the corpus could be extended to cover all American presidencies and an analysis made of the use of other pronouns. Assessing semantic prosody through phraseology patterns uncovered by using concordancing software may provide a means of raising consciousness of the connections between language and power, in this context alerting people to the methods their leaders use to influence them and consequently providing choices previously not clearly visible.