Mr  arrived at  hospital accident and emergency department by ambulance following a 999 call. He was subsequently transferred to a cardiology ward.
There are several salient features of the history which indicate infective endocarditis (IE) as the most likely cause for Mr 's symptoms. Although the majority of his symptoms (i.e. malaise, lethargy, rigors and anaemia) are non-specific, the fact that he has a history of cardiac disease and underwent a dental procedure just prior to the onset of symptoms should raise suspicion of IE. In addition, the onset of loin pain may be due to splenomegaly or immune-complex deposition which is commonly seen in IE. Given his current drug regime and history of heart disease, Mr  is obviously suffering from a minor degree of heart failure (New York classification I). Fortunately however there was nothing to suggest that this had been exacerbated by the recent events, for example as a result of valve destruction. There was also nothing to suggest the occurrence of an infarction (e.g. arterial, pulmonary, coronary or cerebral) as a result of vegetation emboli.
When considering differential diagnoses at this stage, there are numerous conditions which could explain his main symptoms of malaise, lethargy and rigors and the association with a dental procedure may just be incidental. Following his recent hospital admission, anaemia would have to be a possible reason, especially if no underlying cause was previously determined. Secondly, despite the lack of pyrexia and cough, a LRTI may present in this way and given his bronchiectasis, Mr  would have an increased susceptibility to such infections. Elderly patients are also prone to UTI's which can often present with non-specific systemic symptoms. Other conditions such as SLE, sickle cell disease and atrial myxoma (primary cardiac tumour) can also mimic IE.
During the physical examination it would be necessary to assess the cardiovascular, respiratory and abdominal systems as well as searching for more specific clinical signs which indicate IE. Important clinical signs of IE include the following:
The admission notes from A+E will also be obtained in order to provide an insight into Mr 's condition upon arrival.
The admission notes revealed that Mr  was pyrexic (39.7c) on arrival. He also had cold peripheries and a reduced oxygen saturation which may indicate a degree of anaemia. Significant findings from the systems examinations included splinter haemorrhages, anaemia and the detection of a previously undocumented MR murmur. These all point towards a diagnosis of IE as previously suggested by the history. Although some basal lung crepitations were heard indicating consolidation, Mr  was not suffering from any specific respiratory symptoms and therefore they were assumed to be due to some minor mucus collection as would be expected in bronchiectasis - There was nothing to suggest it was infected at present.
Mr  appears to be suffering from infective endocarditis, which has presented in an atypical fashion due to the absence of pyrexia. In addition to the physical diagnosis, it is important to consider the psychosocial implications this condition may have upon Mr . Despite his history of cardiac disease, Mr  exhibits remarkably good health for his age, which allows him to lead a fully independent life and even participate in a daily exercise routine. His reported anxiety and low mood during the past 6 weeks obviously highlights his concern for his health, and therefore it would be important to consider the impact a complication such as severe heart failure would have upon his lifestyle and mental health. Fortunately however there does appear to be significant family support network available to care for him in the event of chronic complications.
Six days after being admitted and starting the antibiotics, Mr  reported a significant improvement in his health. As shown above, his temperature had fallen significantly over the first four days, and his blood results from day 6 also started to show some improvement particularly his WCC.
With regard to prognosis, the mortality rate in patients with sensitive streptococcus infections is 6%. This is considerably better than the 30+% rate observed in patients with staphylococcus, enterococci or fungal infections. There are however a few additional factors which have a detrimental effect upon prognosis including:
Given that Mr  is in a relatively good physical condition for his age, with limited co-morbidity, and the fact that he has shown a significant improvement since starting treatment, there appears to be a good prognosis for him. However, further follow up was not possible at the time.
Murtagh B et al (2003) highlighted the difficulties associated with diagnosing infective endocarditis and the important role the Duke criteria has assumed over the past decade in allowing early detection of this often occult disease. In addition they also described the increasing importance of echocardiography, in particular TOE which is much more sensitive and specific than transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) at detecting vegetations less than 10 mm in diameter. This is of great value considering that it is vegetations >10mm in diameter which are thought to be at the greatest risk of embolising.
Infective endocarditis is three times more common in males than in females, and although it may occur in a people of any age, the frequency is increased in elderly individuals, with 25-50% of cases occurring in those older than 60 years (Brusch, 2005).
This case has provided an opportunity to study infective endocarditis in much greater detail. In particular it has highlighted the difficulties which may arise in diagnosing the condition due to its diverse and non-specific clinical presentation. The value of the Duke criteria when trying to confirm a diagnosis has also been exemplified. Furthermore it has allowed the management and possible complications to be studied.