The wood mouse (Apodemus sylvaticus) has often been found to express the symptoms of 'insular syndrome'. This is not a disease but a phenomena that occurs within island populations of a variety of vertebrates, and is expressed in the evolution of a different body size, and occasionally altered behavioural patterns. Preliminary investigations of small mammals on the Isle of Cumbrae, Scotland, produced a wood mouse of large proportions and lead us to investigate further into the possibility of the occurrence of insular syndrome in the island population. The results were inconclusive as only two mice were caught overall and one of them gave birth after it was caught, however unusual population densities of Wood mice and Common Shrews (
Preliminary trapping was carried out over three nights, 12
All of the traps were laid close to the University Marine Biological Station, Millport on the Isle of Cumbrae off the coast of south-west Scotland. These areas were all within 100m of human habitation. Over the trapping period 11 animals were caught, 9 Common shrews and 2 One of the
It was concluded that although the measurements of the mouse fit into the range for the yellow-necked mouse ( Also the known range of the yellow-necked mouse does not extend as far north as the Isle of Cumbrae. However the weight and the tail length of the mouse were unusually large compared with the mainland size ranges.
There were 64 Longworth live-capture traps (Fig 2) available for use. Hay was added as bedding and bird seed was added as food for the In case of the unintended capture of shrews, cat food was also added to minimise deaths. The traps were checked once in the morning and once in the evening. Trap night (TN) in this case therefore refers to a 12 hour period during the day or the night.
 These were on the south side of the island and were closer to human habitation.
Trap success was found to be much higher at the sites near human habitation (Table 3). Many
The mouse caught during the preliminary experiment was kept as an example of a large sized island A few days into the experimental period it gave birth to 2 pups. The female was reweighed a few weeks after giving birth and she weighed 8.3g less. The pups were weighed at the end of September but they were still below the adult weight range so had not matured enough to be included in the research.
The
At the end of the survey period only 2 Both mice were females and had tails that were longer than the mainland range. The average length of the two island tail measurements (99.5mm) was 17.5 mm longer than the mainland average of 82mm and was 6.5mm longer than the top of the range (93mm) (Table 5)
The results gained from the trapping period for wood mice were not enough to form any solid conclusions on the island Also the
The results gained from the Some island populations of These characteristics were not investigated in this survey.
Why were so few mice caught and so many shrews?
If the results are to be considered a representation of the small mammal populations of Cumbrae then it seems that Also many other species thought to be present on Cumbrae were not caught such as pigmy shrews and voles, these species are usually caught on the mainland and may indicate a lack of competitor species on the island. The two species should be equally as 'trappable' on Cumbrae as on the British mainland, however population density cannot be compared directly to mainland results for similar environments due to the incompatibility of the random trap layout used in this experiment with the transect layout of the British Mammal Societies survey traps. However estimates and experiences (Colin Prescott) of mainland trapping, suggest that there should be a higher density of This may have been due to the availability of suitable foods or habitat; also it could have been due to predation.  The main predators of Other predators of  The area around the marine station may have been a sanctuary from many of these predators due to the presence and activities of humans. From the results of the trapping it appears that there are only these two small mammals present on Cumbrae therefore there may be an uneven occurrence of predation between the species, Advantages of
The trapping period was not extensive enough to answer the questions posed on the differences between British mainland and Island populations of Another important observation that was not made was whether the animals were in their adult stage of life as this would be important in order that the sizes could be comparable with current records (Lomolino 1985). Further research into the unexpected densities of For example owl pellets could be examined to identify the bones contained within them and to which species they belong. It must be noted however that permission would need to be gained to specifically intend to trap shrews.