Miss  arrived at  hospital's accident and emergency department by ambulance following a road traffic accident
Despite the extent of this young lady's initial injuries following the RTA, she is fortunately continuing to make a steady and progressive recovery. With regard to further analysis and diagnosis, this case will therefore focus upon the excessive urinary output and polydipsia which was detected during her recovery phase, as this provides a valuable opportunity to discuss the investigation and management of acute polyuria.
No significant signs were elicited during the examination, however this would be expected in the case of diabetes insipidus. In order to confirm a diagnosis of diabetes insipidus, a water deprivation test should be performed. This test would also allow differentiation between cranial and nephrogenic DI. No neurological abnormalities were detected and the abdominal tingling was most likely to be a result of the laparotomy wound.
Miss  appears to be suffering from cranial diabetes insipidus as a result of the head injuries sustained during the RTA. Confirmation of this diagnosis will however require a water deprivation test. In addition to this possible diagnosis,  is still recovering from severe head injuries and multiple fractures and will require a significant period of rehabilitation. Even then a complete recovery can by no means be guaranteed. The recent events are also likely to have a significant psychological impact upon , not only will she have to deal with the psychological trauma associated with her RTA injuries but also a possible diagnosis of DI which will require life long therapy. In this case, extra support may be required in order to help her deal with the psychological issues, particularly to prevent the recurrence of eating disorders. With regard to her social situation,  is fortunate enough to have a close supportive family, however her age must also be considered in the context of her head injuries. This young graduate is only 24 and previously lead a fully independent life. She is now faced with the possibility that her mobility and degree of independence may be limited in future. Fortunately diabetes insipidus wouldn't necessarily have a significant social impact if controlled appropriately.
25 days after RTA:
With regard to DI her prognosis is excellent. Since treatment with desmopressin was initiated,  has been passing urine four times a day and has reported no nocturia or sensation of thirst. The occasional urinary incontinence has also stopped. She has now been switched to intranasal desmopressin 20mcg bd pending her discharge. Her mobility has continued to improve and an orthopaedic consultation had been arranged in order to discuss removal of the plaster cast. A speech and language assessment reported good communication at conversational level, although her speech remained slightly slurred but intelligible. She was orientated to time and place. There were still obvious memory problems although she was able to retrieve memories with maximum prompts. She continues to maintain a normal diet along with twice daily fortisip supplements.
A study by Agha et al (2004) reported that up to 21% of patients suffering moderate to severe traumatic brain injury developed DI in the immediate post-injury period. However, 6.9% patients still exhibited permanent DI at a later follow-up; a figure which is higher than traditionally thought. They stressed the importance of identifying patients with partial posttraumatic DI as appropriate treatment may reduce morbidity and optimise the potential for recovery. Yuan and Wade (1991) reported similar findings, showing cranial DI in 26% of patients. They also reported that various other post-traumatic neuroendocrine abnormalities (e.g. SIADH, Addison's disease, hyperprolactinaemia, low GH) also occur early and with high frequency in such injuries.
A report by Laczi and Orv (2002) stated that the diuresis associated with cranial diabetes insipidus can be most effectively decreased by vasopressin substitution. The non-vasopressin containing oral antidiuretics previously used have become outdated in the treatment of central diabetes insipidus, with the first choice compound for this purpose now being 1-desamino-8-D-arginine-vasopressin (DDAVP). Although treatment may be required immediately, most cases arising as a result of TBI recover completely, but there is an appreciable frequency of long-term DI which can be subtle and should be recognized and managed appropriately (Bondanelli et al, 2005).
This case has provided an opportunity to examine the causes of polyuria, and in particular the diagnosis, investigation and management of cranial diabetes insipidus.