The study looks at the interaction between the different species of ant present within the site, and the kind of influence a species of ant has on another species of ant. If one species of worker ants were present in one area of the site would it encourage other species of ants, or deter other species of ants from entering this area. The question this was looking at was; is one ant community dependent on the presents of anther ant community? The results from this study showed that Were as The study then looks at as to why these species interact or coexist together.
The second aspect of this study is how the structure and types of habitats affect the structure of an ant community. Does the amount of coverage in an area influence the amount or the species of ant found at that location? The results produced in a T-test showed that This study then looks at why
Ants come under the category of hymenoptera and they are one of the groups within this order that are eusocial, ants belong to the family Formicidae, but because there are so many species of ant (9,000 worldwide) 10 subfamilies have been created (Dorling 2001). The colonies are structured with a queen ant which is the only Female to mate; the fact that she is the only one to mate means the queen is the only one that can produce a female. The male in the colony can be produced by an unfertilised egg so any female with ovaries in the colony can produce a son by Parthenogensis (Sudd and Franks 1987 as cited from Myrmica;Smeeton, 1981). However most females in the colony are infertile and without ovaries this is because it is the females in an ant colony that are the worker ants, so they are produced infertile. Reproduction in an ant is determined by the ant's diet, a rich diet will ensure the ant becomes reproductive, and reproduction is only carried out by the queens and males in the colony (Dorling 2001). The queen will remain in the nest while the worker ants will go out and forage for food and raise the young.
For the structure of the ant community to be maintained it requires the ants to be able to pass information between them. The ants' method of communication relies on pheromones which can be used to produce the 'colony odour' which allows nest mates to identify each other, this pheromone dwells in the cuticles of adult ants and is not present in young ants, the pheromones that are not linked to 'colony odour' are secreted from specialised exocrine glands. Another pheromone is the alarm pheromones which cause the ants to attack any foreign being that enters their colony. The other types of pheromone used are recruitment pheromones which help in obtaining recourses and sexual pheromones used in mating. It was Holldobler (1978 as cited in Sudd & Franks 1987) that placed the types of pheromones into these categories.
Within a community there is a verity of jobs that need to be done, the jobs are delectated by age, and this process is based on a polyethism system (Sudd and Frank 1987). The youngest worker ants remain in the nest were it is safe and perform duties such as tending to the queen, maintaining the nest and taking care of the brood. Foraging duties are given to old worker ants because this work contains more hazards and these ants are near the end of their life. It is these old worker ants that this study looks at, for they are what leave the nest.
This study was carried out at Rennes field centre in Paimpont, France. The study looked at the community structure of ants in different habitats, since the worker ant is the only ones to leave the nest it was the structure of worker ants that was looked at.
To be able to address how different habitats affect the structure of ant's community a site was needed that contained a wide rang of habitats. The area this study was conducted in was 15m by 18m and was on a very gentle slope that sloped downwards (fig1).
The site contained a variety of habitats, short grass lands, long grass, concrete, stones, rocks, mud, burnt grassland, mossy cover, dead bush, gorse and brambles. The pictures below show some of the variety of habitats contained within the site.
Grid the site out into1m squared squares and places the letters A-O along the top and the numbers 1-18 down the side. Make a map of the site including all the vegetation present on the site (as in fig 27). Randomly generate a set of coordinates and use this random system to select your locations for the quodrates. Take four quodrates sized approximately half a metre and place them together at the selected coordinates to make one large quodrate. Record the coverage within each small quodrate, and then spend a minute on the quadrate counting the amount of each species of ant that are present within a quadrate. Collect one specimen from each species of ant you find and take it back to the laboratory to be keyed out down to its species. When recording how many ants were present also record what activity they were undergoing, and what the weather was like at the time.
When the entire grid has been quodrated take you data and do a CHI
The table below show how many species of ant was found in each grid on our site and the percentage of coverage for each grid.
Research has been done on the types of interactions that accrued between ants, the interactions have been categorised into groups depending on how much the two species interacted. The groups ranged from cohabitation with no interaction to a complete association between a parasite and the host colony (Lenoir etl 2001). The ants that fall between these two extreams of interaction are the thief ants, which only interact when the thief ant steals pupae or the forage from another worker ant of a different species.  Another ant that steals pupae from The results gathered from our site showed Nether of the two species of ant have ever been recorded as acting as parasite or host ant to the other species. So this suggest another reason for the association, However in this study a nest was found for both species of ant, the fact that both species of ant now have their own nest dose not rule out the possibility that earlier in the year the two species of ant did coexist as one colony put makes this hypothesis unlikely. The other possibility is that This behaviour from The behaviour of the ants was recorded in this study as well and none of the ants around this nest were acting acresavle to each other. The two different species of ants would have different 'colony odours', so the The evidence from this study suggests that these two species of ant are reliant upon one another for their communities to survive, and it is quite likely they have formed a mixed colony to allow the survival of both colonies.
The results also show   However the site of our study dose not contain the parasitic ants, instead it shows an interaction between two species of ant that apparently benefits from each others presents. Neither of these two species has been recorded as acting as a host to the opposite species or as an ant that raids the others colony for pupa. The reason for the interaction between these two species is highly speculative, the study shows no evidence to suggest any reason for there interaction, and there appears to be no records of these two species interacting. The two species could be beneficial to each other by providing each other with protection from predators, if they share the same predator its more likely that at least one ant from one species will spot the predator. H.A Gleason hypothesis as to why different species would interact is because they require similar abiotic factors (Cited from Campbell, Reece & Mitchell 1987). However F.E Clements came up with an interactive hypothesis that is the community is linked by biotic interactions without these links a community cannot function as a unit (Cited from Campbell etl 1987). Whether these two species of ant are interacting due to biotic or abiotic factors cannot be determined from this study. The reason for the interaction between them cannot be determined from this study only speculations can be made, for a more accurate reason for the interaction between the two species they would have to be observed in more depth.
 There is no association or dissociation between these two species, the location of these two species is random and not influenced by the other species. The other species found on site were only located in small numbers that where not sufficient to do a chi However if you look at the Location of The nest is located at the edge of the site, then if you look at the location of each species found on site (fig 26) it shows This shows an interesting structure to If you look at the location of Leptothorax Nylanderi nest you can see they use a different structure for there foraging techniques, instead of just foraging in one direction from the nest they forage all round the nest, this can be seen in fig 26.
Another aspect looked at in this study was whether the time of day effected the presents of ants. The start of the day when it was cool and still damp resulted in very few ants of any species being present, by the time morning had warmed up more ants are about, by mid day the majority of ants are out. In the evening the nest for All the species of ant in this study have a preference to warm conditions, all the colonies of these ants only send there worker ants out in the warmest parts of the day to forage.
The temperature is not the only aspect to affect the amount of ants present in an area, the type of habitat present also effect the location of the ants.  There is only a slight difference between the amount of ants located in the 50% regain and the 90% reign. However there are a few more ants located between 10% cover and 50% cover than between 50% and 100% coverage. Fig 9 confirms that   The reason for this may be due to or site containing a high proportion of high coverage areas and only a few   The other ants found on the site were only found in small numbers, so there was insufficient data to determine their preferences to coverage.
The structure of the ant communities found on site varied slightly from species to species. The structure of the communities were partly effected by the surrounding habitats, for habitat influences the location the ants are most likely to be found in, for example a However it is not just the habitat that affects the structure of an ant community, the abiotic factors also influence the way the colony is structured. All the species of ants in this study preferred warm dry conditions, worker ants only go out to forage in dry warm weather, on a wet day the structure of the colony changes, foraging is replaced with another task.
The biotic factors also contribute to the structure of the community. The majority of the ants found on this site had some kind of effect on another species of ant, though this study can only draw speculation as to why different species of ants are interacting, it dose appear that on this site Should If this is the case then However the presents of one species is not interracial to all species Each colony of ants located on this site functions in a different way to the next and is affected by different aspects of the habitat. However it is not just the variation in habitats that affect the ants community structure but a range of factors.