Hen eggs have been eaten for hundreds of years by humans and remain an important nutritional foodstuff. The purpose of this report is to examine, compare and contrast the different systems and techniques used to produce eggs. Then conclude and recommend which system is most appropriate for use in the UK after considering the demands of consumers, economic constraints, environmental and welfare issues that consumers are becoming more and more concerned about. The number of laying hens farmed in the UK is declining due a fall in demand for eggs and an increasing number of eggs being imported from other countries in the free market. Salmonella and cholesterol have been two major factors in reducing demand for eggs as well as improving breeding making hens more efficient reducing number of hens needed. It is predicted that within ten years hens will be able to lay an extra 20 eggs in a cycle reducing UK hen numbers by a further 12.5% (RJ Soffee 2004 p558).
Domestic chickens originate from jungle dwellings in South East Asia and have been bred for centuries by man. Hens retain their natural shy jungle behaviour. They enjoy perching and roosting like they would in trees and scrub in the wild, prefer to stay in the shade during the day but roam open spaces at dawn and dusk and like to dust bath (NFU 2004). Chickens first became popular during Victorian times where households kept small numbers of chickens were kept for their own meat and egg consumption. Small scale commercial flocks of specific laying hens appeared in the 1930s and provided small incomes for farmers. Eggs were rationed by the government until 1953 as a result of Second World War. After this there was great focus on intensive production systems to meet the demands from a growing consumer population. Systems became increasingly intensive until in the 1990's a change in consumer demands has seen three distinct systems develop for egg production. These are the battery cages, barn housing and free range systems. Regulations concerning poultry production are governed by the European Union in the UK.
I believe barn and free range systems should be encouraged in the UK and are the only way profitable way forward for producers. I do agree with the banning of conventional battery systems as anyone would struggle to argue that battery systems are not cruel as they do cause hens pain and distress. Enriched cages offer nearly no additional welfare benefits and I think will cause similar pain to birds than conventional cages. However banning caged systems in the UK I believe, might not solve the welfare problems of conventional caged birds. If a ban was to occur I believe as many current battery producers would move to free range systems for as much as the market would support and the remainder will stop producing eggs. Egg buyers who need cheap eggs to compete in food industry will source cheaper imported eggs that are likely to have been kept in worse battery conditions than in the UK. The WTO is pressuring Europe already to reduce trade tariffs on Europe for eggs to allow more imports. The result would be increased numbers of battery hens in other countries. A survey by the NFU revealed 60% of egg producers in the UK plan not to produce after 2012. It seems the change in EU law will see the end of battery systems altogether in UK. After 2012 UK farmers will have to produce eggs that can be differentiated from cheap imported eggs by being farmed in welfare friendly ways. They must raise consumer awareness about the welfare issues so they ensure they cheek all egg products are made from welfare friendly systems. The best and only profitable way forward for British farmers to win consumer popularity is free range systems.