Until recently the use of sheep and goats to produce dairy products was considered only a viable activity for small hobby farms in UK. However it seems such products have gained popularity with UK consumers for various reasons, creating a very viable niche market for producers to cater for. For many cow dairy farmers struggling with poor milk prices, increased regulation and restrictions created by cow milk quota producing sheep or goat milk could be a realistic and more profitable alternative.
Demand for goat and sheep milk has grown rapidly in the past thirty years and growth looks set to continue in the future. Tesco's reported a 28% increase in demand for goat liquid milk in the past year alone (The Telegraph December 2005). The market for sheep milk is not growing as rapidly but remains still slowly expanding. A number of factors have led to this increase in demand for these products by consumers but the main reason remains the health benefits of sheep and goat milk. Goat and sheep milk is believed to be more beneficial to people with asthma, eczema, migraines and digestive than cow's milk (Angela Shutt- 2002). Some consumers just prefer or want to try the milder and sweeter taste of the milks created by the different make up of the milks compared to cow milk(see table 1.1). Fresh pasteurised liquid goat's milk is available in almost all supermarket shelves costing between 1 and 1.20 a litre (S.A.C.-1999) so is considerable more expensive than liquid cow milk. There is now a push by producers of goat milk products to make supermarkets stock more diverse range of solid goat milk products like yogurt and butter. Sheep milk is more commonly found in cheeses and yogurts but is slowly being demanded in the liquid market but it is still a challenge to market sheep milk in large quantities as it is not found in supermarkets commonly.
Following the recent growth in the demand for Goats milk there are definite opportunities for those looking enter the industry. Also for existing UK dairy farmers looking to increase profit margins and market products more directly to public demands, swapping cow's for goat's may be the answer. Entrants to the market will meet the growing demand but have to be careful not to overproduce as there are no bodies to guarantee a price however if demand increases to rise like it has in the past few years there is certainly scope for expansion. Sheep dairying opportunities are more limited but could be the answer for those looking to market milk small scale amounts more directly to the public (equipment to process own milk costing around 15,000 in total [SAC 1999]) without the use of supermarkets processing and selling own produce. The size of these sectors is easily gauged by the 91,000 dairy goats and 12,000 dairy sheep now in the UK and shows how goat operations are expanding. If the market can continue to sustain farmers going to goat and sheep milk it can continue to grow and mature.