the word hydroponics refers to the cultivation of plants without the use of soil. Instead of soil the nutrients being necessary for the plants' growth are added to the water and as plants are watered they are also fed. The term hydroponics derives from the Greek word hydro+ponos.
actually the method of hydroponics is not new. That is because the Hanging Gardens of Babylon and the Floating Aztec Gardens used hydroponic techniques.
all crops that can be grown in soil can also be grown in a hydroponic system. Among the crops that can be grown hydroponically are vegetables, flowers, herbs, fruits, and foliage.
Water as well as nutrients are always available so the plants are never stressed.
Hydroponic systems use less water as well as nutrients by use of recycling systems.
Hydroponic systems are inside greenhouses so crops can be grown all the year without being dependent on the climate changes.
As there is no soil in hydroponics there are not soil borne pests and diseases and therefore the use of chemicals is reduced.
The fact that there is no soil means that there are no weeds, no need for soil preparation or digging, the product are clean and as a result less work is required.
In a hydroponic system the plants can be planted more densely because roots do not have to spread out in search of water and nutrients.
Better quality products as well as higher yields characterize crops grown hydroponically.
Hydroponic cultivation is characterized by high cost.
Special skills and knowledge are required.
There is a demand for specialized equipment.
By the recycling of water and nutrients several diseases can be spread.
There is a great variety of growing media. Several media that can be used in hydroponics include:
 Is has the disadvantages that has to be sterilised after use as well as poor drainage.
 On the other side, it is heavy and dries out quickly.
 It is expensive, difficult to work with it and algae can be easily grown on it.
Provide support for the roots of the plants.
Bring the water as well as the nutrients in contact with the roots.
Provide roots with oxygen and be able to retain moisture since that is the only source of nutrients.
A good growing medium apart from these functions must also have certain characteristics. So it must be sterile, of neutral pH and finally it must not break down.
The most important factor in terms of hydroponics is the nutrient solution. This solution must contain the following elements: nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, sulphur, iron, manganese, zinc, boron and copper.
The optimum pH is 6-6.5.
Hydroponic systems provide the opportunity to feed more people using less land. They have had a tremendous development over the last years and nowadays are very popular among the other methods of cultivation. Apart from advantages these systems also have disadvantages but the fact is that the benefits deriving from hydroponic systems outnumber the disadvantages.