This essay starts by introducing some basic differential and algebraic topology. We then move into more advanced areas such as the various characteristic classes. The algebraic topology, which takes up much of the essay, is approached from an algebraist viewpoint. We take time to appreciate the algebraic structure of cohomology including group cohomology although we develop the main ideas in the form of De Rham cohomology from differential forms. We also take a quick look at an application of cohomology to representation theory.
After preparing ourselves, we give a sketch of the proof of an interesting theorem we wish to explore. This work is quite wide-ranging and we content ourselves with giving an introduc-tion to the main thread which involves the development of Yang-Mills moduli spaces. The theorem has a corollary that tells us that there are 'exotic' 4-manifolds, which are homotopy equivalent but not diffeomorphic to any complex surface.
The essay is presented in three chapters - the first two covering topics from smooth manifolds to cohomology and Poincare duality. The second chapter discusses applications of what was discussed in the first - operations on vector bundles and the treatment of characteristic classes. The final section give an in-depth discussion of the main theorem and a sketch of the proof.
This is one of the more interesting facts in contemporary research in differential topology. Simon Donaldson proved this in the early eighties and won the Fields' Medal in 1984 for his efforts. It is definitely one of the more intensive research topics which have led to the Fields' Medal. For example, although the proof of Monstrous Moonshine by Borcherds was a momentous achievement, the sheer volume of background knowledge required for this topological work is breathtaking.
We aim to give a good introduction to some of this mathematics which runs through Kahler manifolds to ASD connections.
From this point on we restrict our attention to 4-manifolds and their topology. This type of work is the perfect setting to describe the cohomology and related issues that were in-troduced above. In this section we will direct our attention to compact, simply connected, differentiable 4-manifolds and will give a proof of a result involving simply connected, com-plex surfaces. We will be forced to introduce some new methods as well, but will try to approach the theorem without any major headaches. Many of these new ideas are quite complicated so we content ourselves with a more general explanation of ideas.