This essay begins by investigating quaternions. The emphasis is on their relations to rotations in four dimensions. It then progresses to a more general overview of division algebras with the aim of investigating proofs by Hurwitz and Frobenius. It then explores the Cayley-Dickson construction and a brief foray into the octonions and SO(8). It closes with a brief account of the Freudenthal square, a relationship between the normed division algebras and the exceptional Lie algebras.
Acknowledgements: Thanks to Tim Honeywill, Professor David Mond and Geraint Williams for advice, guidance and inspiration and above all to Dr. Allan Muir for without his skill, wisdom and patience this essay would not have been possible.
 An algebra is a vector space with a multiplication and left and right distributivity. A A normed division algebra is an algebra with the additional property that A is a normed vector space with "This implies that A is a division algebra and that
That We have
so
and We also see that When We see that when This follows from
Theorem 1.
Proof:
The matrix of the rotation is We can see that det R = 1 so
This essay will explore other such algebras and investigate We will also research some applications to geometry, uses in rotations, construction of hyperdimensional objects and some interesting algebras.
2 Dual, Double and
Take a number of the form Let us find a rule satisfying
and such that the distributive law is satisfied. We require that Then We can see that this multiplication Then we can write
There are three cases to consider KS89 , the first being Then This means that a +
The second case is Then we set So a + bi may be written as These are the
The third case is We have
The story of William Rowan Hamilton and his discovery of quaternions is familiar to all [H2004]. His 'Eureka!' moment and subsequent etching of the relation
into the stone of the Brougham bridge is part of mathematical legend.
Quaternions become familiar during some elementary course in the algebra of rings. However, it was probably discussed as a brief example of a division ring with only a brief mention as regards to rotation.
Hamilton was interested by how He was desperate to find an algebra serving the same purpose for 3-dimensions. He later wrote that his son, William Edwin, would ask at breakfast: "Well, Papa, can you multiply triplets". His answer was always: "No, I can only add and subtract them" [H2004, H2000].
William Edwin was referring to Hamilton's attempts to construct an algebra with elements of the form z = a + bi + cj where Addition is a simple matter but, as Hamilton discovered, multiplication proves to be a much more complicated issue. We need a rule satisfying
and such that the distributive law is satisfied. Let us use
This is easily seen to satisfy the above requirements. We also notice that the multiplication rule is commutative and associative. The problem arises when we come to division. Take It can be shown that for ever multiplication rule satisfying the above conditions, there exist z
Hamilton's own block was caused by (a + He was considering triplets with The problem lay in the fact that Hamilton required We see
leading Hamilton to consider the, somewhat absurd, requirement that Then he realised that This was quite a breakthrough, since anticommutativity was not often considered at this time. Then came the inspiration while walking alongside the Royal Canal and quaternions were born.
We recall that a The quaternion is usually expressed, with respect to a basis {1, i,j, k}, in the familiar form We may multiply a pair of quaternion expressions using the distributive law and employing the basic relations:
So we see that for two quaternions
The algebra formed by this operation of quaternion multiplication is commonly denoted as
Example 1.
For each quaternion It is also true that This means that a norm We see that
Theorem 2. H is a
Proof:
When we show that Multiplicative associativity can be easily shown:
We can show distributivity since
and right distributivity is shown similarly. Now, for One of the norms must be zero, without loss of generality say The norm is zero when the components of Then, since this proves that So we now have that the quaternions
As an alternative proof, let Then, with some work, we can see that this defines an associative algebra structure on the real algebra We consider the real linear automophism We see We define Then So
There are many other useful representations of this algebra, most commonly used and useful forms are the following.
1. A quaternion Multiplication of two quaternions of this form
takes a form expressible in terms of the dot and cross products of 3-dimensional vector algebra:
2. Let us denote the imaginary element of This is so as to avoid confusion with the quaternion basis element, The matrices We can also introduce the unit matrix element, This has the form
We note that the associativity of quaternions now follows automatically from that of matrices.
An interesting thought here is to consider the quaternion group group We see We then have a representation Furthermore,
3. We now fix the quaternion We note that the composition of functions such as this is given by Then we deduce We discuss this in detail later on.
Since This yields
Obviously this can be written in the form
with Note, one can similarly define a linear map
There are many intriguing relationships to be explored between these different representations and are worth exploring simply for entertainment and interest's sake. An interesting fact is noted below.
A That is, G is a subset
Theorem 3. H is a
Proof:
H is diffeomorphic to Hence It is easily seen that Then the condition that there exists a map
Let us suppose that Let x be a quaternion of the form bi + cj + dk such that We can treat it as an ordinary element of Then, we have
The map We can see that it then follows that this linear map will define a rotation of 3-dimensional Euclidean space. A homomorphism is defined from the multiplicative structure of This means that the multiplication of quaternions is mapped to the composition of rotations.
Theorem 4.
Proof:
All elements of SO(3) are determined by both a unit vector Note: There exists a slight ambiguity here since a rotation through
We shall now consider the quaternion
Consider
It is obvious that
product as Thus
Let us consider an unit vector Using the scalar-vector notation which has been discussed previously, we see
Then
This gives
So
Any rotation may be captured by a unit quaternion mapping of the form So we see that this can be used to to resolve the ambiguity noted above.
We may pursue this a bit further by taking note of the fact that for unit quaternions, the 2x2 complex representation discussed in a previous section is a unitary matrix
So we have The set of unit quaternions forms a group under multiplication which is isomorphic to the special unitary group in two dimensions, SU(2). In general, SU(n) denotes the group of complex, n x n unitary matrices with determinant 1.
After his discovery, Hamilton dedicated his life to quaternions and their application to geometry. Many universities used quaternions for work in There were quite a few battles fought between the 'vectorists' and the 'quaternionists', although vectors were finally accepted as the standard. Indeed, many mathematicians and physicists were particularly vicious about quaternions. Kelvin himself opined, "Though beautifully ingenious, the quaternions have been an unmixed evil to those who have touched them in any way". Faced with opposition by luminaries such as Kelvin, it is not surprising that vectors were victorious over quaternions. It must be noted, however, that vectors are much simpler to use, although their use is quite mechanical and not as much fun as the quaternions.
The development in the understanding of linear algebra, means that many of the amusing properties of quaternions can equally and sometimes more profitably seen as a special case of a matrix group. This is in fact a great pity since quaternions are beautiful objects, worthy of study although they are not regarded as highly as they have been in the past.
The above theorem relating quaternions to three-dimensional rotations may simply be regarded as a group homomorphism Simply put, it is a representation of the group The mapping was shown earlier to be 2:1 so the inverse map cannot be regarded as a representation of SO(3) by complex 2x2 matrices. However, it is a kind of double-valued representation, if we allow ourselves to be a bit lax regarding the double-valued nature of the inverse mapping. Namely, it is what is known as a It is possible to put an equivalence relation on Then the inverse map may be treated as a one-one map from SO(3) to the set of equivalence classes. For
What are spinors? Spinors are two-component complex column vectors. They were discovered by Elie Cartan and re-invented by Pauli and Dirac to describe spin, a fundamental property of the elementary particles. An n-dimensional spinor of a certain type is an element of the vector space on which a real Lie group called the spinor group
Spinors first became prominent with the advent of quantum mechanics. This happened when Dirac realised that a spinor representation of an electron's state was required for the correct relativistic equations for describing the electron. In quantum theory the double-valuedness is not a big obstacle as in classical physics since the observable properties of a system are expressed through quadratic expressions of the wave function, removing the They are still used today within particle physics where bosons and fermions require either tensor or spinor descriptions. They are also used within research on loop quantum gravity, the main rival of M-theory as a budding GUT.
Here follows a fantastic diversion for the next two sections. As we know, there are five regular or 'Platonic' solids. Namely these are the tetrahedron, cube, octahedron, icosahedron and the dodecahedron. Now an unit quaternion can represent a rotation in 3-dimensional Euclidean space. The rotation groups of these solids are useful in other areas of mathematics but here we ask
First consider a regular tetrahedron Such a direction will be referred to as an outward-pointing normal to the tetrahedron. We can achieve any even permutation of {A, B, C, D} by a rotation, so that the group of rotations is A4, with There are three distinct types of group elements.
First are the rotations which fix a single vertex. For example, we find a rotation leaving Let us call this rotation D1. D1 We call this rotation D2. A1, A2, B1, B2, C1, C2 are similarly defined. We now define the second type of rotation through Rotations AC and AD are similarly defined. The third type of rotation is the identity Id. The cubes of the first type and the squares of the second type are equal to Id.
We only need two examples to generate these rotations. Let us choose Denote these by
The
Let us describe the tetrahedron in coordinate form. Opposite edges are at right angles so we can arrange We then write We arrange Then Letting the edges be of the same length and the position vectors be unit vectors we have
Using the quaternion formula for a rotation we have
and
 The quaternion representations of the remaining rotations may be calculated from the presentation given above.
We consider quaternions corresponding to elements of A4, together with their negatives. We can take these quaternions as 24 distinct points in four dimensions. They are unit quaternions and so lie on the surface of the unit 4-sphere These points are taken as vertices of a hypersolid and form a polyhedron by joining each vertex to its nearest neighbours.
We may define distance on the surface of a sphere in terms of angles separating vectors to those points from the centre of the sphere. A quaternion analogue for the cosine rule is needed. We consider a triangle which is defined by two quaternions
Comparing this with the cosine rule
gives
We start with a quaternion and calculate the cosine of the angle with all other quaternions. We see the largest cosine not equal to 1 is So we set up a network, G, with 24 vertices and an edge for each pair of vertices whose angle cosine is
Every vertex has 8 neighbours. Take The common neighbours to these two vertices are Exploring in this way while examining angles between edges, we find the smallest hypersurface polyhedron to be an octahedron. The hypersurface must be built from regular three-dimensional solids of which there are only five types, so most are easy to eliminate making the work a lot simpler. The six vertices
form a typical octahedron the bracketed pairs here being opposite, non-connected vertices of the octahedron.
To complete the task we find the centre of the octahedron as the mean of any of these opposite pairs. We then normalise it to unit length so that it lies on Joining pairs of points by line segments according to the adjacency information contained in the network This three-dimensional projection may be displayed on a Maple worksheet as displayed. This beautiful object is called the 24-Cell [S2001].
We regard SO(4) as the group of rotations for four-dimensional Euclidean space. This would include rotations such as those of the 24-Cell. We may consider some quaternion pairs as rotations in four-dimensional Euclidean space.
Take two unit quaternions There exists a relationship between SO(4) and SO(3) x SO(3). More accurately, there is an isomorphism between the projective groups
Take a rotation We know that
Theorem 5. Eigenvalues of orthogonal matrices have unit modulus.
Proof:
Let Take the complex transpose so that We know that A is real so Then
Since x is an eigenvector it is nonzero and as such
Since the eigenvalues of
We will take these vectors to be an orthonormal set. We see that
We also see
With respect to the orthonormal basis {e1, e2, e3, e4} the matrix form is now
We may interpret this as a product of commuting rotations,
Take any unit quaternions r, Then we may regard the mapping Let us consider the case Then we get the rotation Similarly, for Finally, the rotation A is given by
We will discover an expression for the quaternions r, s without considering a change of basis. Let us consider the quaternions corresponding to a rotation through We suppose that a non-zero quaternion q is fixed under the mapping We split the quaternions into scalar and vector parts by writing
Then
So we see
The scalar and vector parts of this equation may be considered as:
with
We then (scalar) multiply equation (2) by x and (1) gives
 Hence So equations (1), (2) become
Let the orthonormal quaternions Then:
So from (3a), (3b)
for some
To both sides of (4a) we take the scalar product by Substitute back into (4a), (4b) and use (5) to find
Then
Thus The quaternions we need are
and
The rotation clearly occurs in the orthogonal two-space with q1,q2 held fixed, The orthogonality conditions
or
are satisfied by all We are thus able to move In particular,
Then
The angle between
Thus
and then
To find the quaternion expression for the rotation
Then rotation R1(
given by an application of the results in the previous section. Similarly,
Then the quaternion pair (r,
As we stated earlier, there exists a relationship between SO(4) and SO(3) x So any rotation in four dimensions can be written as As previously, let Then we can write Quaternion multiplication is associative, so if we write R for the matrix representation of right multiplication by r and S for the matrix representation of left multiplication by s, then rqs = RS since So A = RS.
The bigger problem is to demonstrate that this construction gives every orthogonal matrix. This is the problem of actually finding r and s when you're given an orthogonal matrix.
We can write
and
These are easily seen to be isometric with the origin as a fixed point so they are rotations in
We see
From RS we can find a
Writing
we see that
Theorem 6.
Proof:
It is easily seen that the sum of the elements of For 2-by-2 complementary minors Then So there exist a, So each matrix of a 4D rotation is composed of matrices
Problem solved! If we look carefully through the above work, we can easily see how the quaternion pair (r,
Example 2.
We are rotating vectors in four dimensions so let us have co-ordinate axes 1, i, j, k with O the origin. Let Then we can see that
 The
matrix
of rotation Thus we conclude our brief exploration of the link between quaternions and rotations.
Consider an expression of the form
where all the Addition
We write
where There are n
We have We obtain
by rewriting
A system, with addition and multiplication, as defined above is known as an The expressions are called The complex numbers, dual numbers, double numbers and quaternions are all examples of hypercomplex numbers.
In all hypercomplex number systems it is always true that
and
for real a,
A normed division algebra is a division algebra with a norm The familiar hypercomplex number systems are all normed division algebras, although this is not necessarily true for all such systems. We will now show that R, C, H and O are the only normed division algebras. Consider the First we note that the inner product This is easily seen since
by Also,
For This is easily seen since, by the previous paragraph,
We have
Then it becomes apparent that
We let We now evaluate composition, conjugation and the inner product on the Dickson double algebra, S + iS. We have (a+ib, c+id) = (a,c)+ (b, d) since (a, id) = 0, (ib, c) = 0, Then
so Lastly,
so
Letting Expanding gives
So
19
We have For
Letting Suppose Then
So we can write the following, due to Hurwitz:
Theorem 7. R, C, H
Proof:
The real numbers R are commutative, associative and have trivial conjugation. The complex numbers C is a commutative, associative algebra. The quaternions H is an associative normed division algebra. The octonions O is non-associative so its Dickson double algebra is not a normed division algebra.
It is important to remember that a normed division algebra is not necessarily a division ring, or any kind of ring. The fundamental properties of rings include associativity under multiplication. The octonions O is a normed division algebra which is non-associate. Therefore, it is not a ring.
The next two theorems, due to Fronebius, are of great interest to us. It enhances the link between the normed division algebras and division algebras in general.
Theorem 8.
Proof:
Let Let Multiplying on the left by b, we have b(ea) = ba = (be)a so be = b and A has an identity. Elements ce form a subalgebra R which is isomorphic to R.
If If we say dim
The general mth-degree polynomial can be written
as a product of linear and irreducible quadratic polynomials. We may replace We see that a cannot satisfy a linear equation since e and Therefore,
If  so Let Then, unless We assume that We choose So
Let We also have
Then So We have Thus, any product is a linear combination of the elements so It is isomorphic to H by the following.
We must show that Since c and c belong to distinct complex subalgebras they are linearly independent, so we need only show the same for To prove, we suppose Multiplying on the left by c gives Rearranging, and then taking the difference of the two expressions gives But it is impossible to find a real So the elements form a basis. We have Q" = H since we can see the multiplication rules we examined above give the multiplication table of H.
If Take c not in
so Then we see that But ix = c is not solvable for So we have a contradiction [KS89].
More generally we have a proof that A is a normed algebra, which implies the result we are looking for by Hurwitz's theorem.
Theorem 9.
Proof:
The ideas upon which the previous proof was based also hold for an alternative division algebra. The first thing we realise is that this theorem can be stated as follows: Every alernative division algebra is isomorphic to a normed division algebra. Then the rest follow by Hurwitz. So we need to define an inner product such that
We define a conjugation operation on If If a and e are linearly independent, then Let also
We see Then Then This lets us deduce
The conjugate of
We define an inner product We see Then The result follows by Hurwitz.
We now explore another way to classify associative division algebras that is, perhaps, not so direct. The Brauer group arose out of an attempt to classify division rings.
To get started we need a few definitions and redefinitions.
A ring We now redefine the associative division algebra. An F-algebra A is known as a division algebra if the units of A are the quotient ring A/{0} [S99].
As we know, the If A is an algebra over F, then so is An R-module is a set that has multiplication and addition operations, forming an abelian group under addition and satisfying
and
for An R-module is simple if it has no nontrivial submodule. M
 Let A be a simple F-algebra. For some division algebra D and some positive integer n, there is an isomorphism from A to Mn(D).
Proof:
Let A-module structure is given by the ring homomor-phism This is injective because
By Schur's Lemma, a name familiar from representation theory for another different lemma, we have Then
Note: The Double Centralizer Theorem states that for an Artinian ring For a proof see [H78].
Theorem 11 (Schur's Lemma).
Proof:
The proof is quite simple. Since So
An F-algebra It is easily shown that an F-algebra is central simple if and only if it is isomorphic to M
Theorem 12. An F-algebra is central simple if and only if it is isomorphic to Mn(D) for a division algebra D with center F.
Proof:
 Conversely,
We briefly define the tensor product. Take three A-modules say We construct an A-module Such a module P is called a tensor product of R and S, denoted We note that
Theorem 13. The tensor product of two central simple F-algebras is another central simple F-algebra.
Proof:
We first show that Suppose that I is a nonzero ideal of this tensor product and let Assume
A is simple so the ideal Then we have So we can find For Then So, by definition,
It remains to show that We identify F with Then Let Then Then Write So Therefore,
Then
The last theorem, and the one following, are needed to define an operation on a particular group:
Theorem 14.
Proof:
From the definition of the center of a ring Then
We define a map This map is obviously a homomorphism, since it respect addition a multiplication in the given tensor product. Since It is surjective since
We say that This is easily seen to be an equivalence relation, satisfying symmetry, reflexivity and transistivity. We let [A] denote the equivalence class of A, a central simple algebra. We denote
The It is the set  We have We have Then Br(F) is an abelian group since the tensor product is both associative and commutative.
Theorem 15. We can show that there is a bijection between the elements of Br(F) and the division algebras D with center F, mapping D to the element represented by Mn(D).
Proof:
We have
so all representatives of a certain element of
So we have proved that there is a bijective correspondence between the division algebras D over F and the elements of
Example 3. We do not progress deeply into this subject matter so our example is very simple.
There is a huge number of Brauer groups, of course, since we can have It is possible also to calculate Brauer groups for commutative rings and there is more application throughout Galois cohomology, although this is far beyond the scope we wish to discuss.
Before we get around to Recall the definition of an We see that
The An algebra is An algebra is alternative, (aa)b = a(ab),(ba)a = b(aa), if the subalgebra generated by two elements is associative, when [a, a, b] = 0. If the subalgebra generated by three elements is associative [a,b,c] = 0, then A is associative.
Cayley-Dickson construction is a process by which we may create These new hypercomplex numbers are constructed from This is done by the process of defining the multiplication rule for the
If we let
then the Cayley-Dickson process defines the multiplication of
where Let us try to create some of the algebras we have already met.
Consider this with Cayley-Dickson multiplication rule for (a; We have Take the complex numbers Then This shows that
Let us write We need to introduce Consider the Cayley-Dickson multiplication of two quaternions defined as ordered pairs of complex numbers, (a; b), (c; d), with We have
Take two quaternions, each in terms of two complex numbers, Then Compare this with the above. We see that there is a term consisting of This is a new imaginary number
Similarly, let We define the octonions, Multiplication of U and V is given thus:
So, we begin to wonder, why are there no other division algebras? Indeed, why can't we have an infinite chain of algebras, each constructed by applying the Cayley-Dickson process to the previous algebra? As we have noted earlier, R is a commutative division algebra with trivial conjugation. C is also commutative but trivial conjugation is lost. For quaternions, we lose commutativity and associativity is lost for the octonions. As we go on, our algebras lose properties.
Let us define a c-algebra as an algebra with conjugation, The c-algebra is real if a = c(a), and nicely normed if If A is nicely normed,
[B2002]. If If
division algebra. This is seen by
Applying the Cayley-Dickson construction to the c-algebra (a, This leads us to the conclusion that
 Then
so Conversely, let Then
So
 Then
while
We can see that these are equal since
 Then
and
Similar for So Converse is simple.
That So we see that we can only construct a small number of division algebras by applying the Cayley-Dickson process [B2002].
The octonions were first discovered in late 1844 by John Graves, shortly after quaternions came to light. He expounded his new "octaves" to his college friend, Hamilton. Unfortunately, Arthur Cayley discovered octonions in 1845 and beat Graves to publication: they became known as "Cayley Numbers". The octonions are another hypercomplex number system; as shown it is a non-associative, normed division algebra. From the Cayley-Dickson process we know it is an alternative, nicely-normed c-algebra. The multiplication table for O takes the form displayed.
The octonions are given the form
There are a few interesting facts about octonions, which we will investigate below. Despite this, they are largely ignored - even more so than the quaternions. There are many reasons for this, including the fact that Cayley was more concerned with the link between quaternions and hyperelliptic functions; that Cayley numbers were a mathematical oddity that arose from his research with no practical application. The quaternions form However, O is both useful and beautiful; and much of the rest of the essay is devoted to exploring how [CS2003].
Since associativity fails, it is sensible to investigate the multiplication operators before we proceed. We define three maps,  We see that This is known as the first Moufang law [CS2003]. We recall that a reflection in a vector x is expressed as Given our previous study we see,
An
We see that An So These notations can be considered equivalent.
A If We see that c is a monotopy if and only if there are elements This is since We see that
Now we shall prove that multiplications by unit octonions generate SO(8) in the same way that the complex numbers and quaternions generate SO(2) and SO(4) respectively. First, it is easily seen that if
We may then prove that if Let If we let Putting
Theorem 16.
Proof:
We may write We have We see that So
We have seen earlier that 1 keeps The group of such isotopies is a 2:1 cover of SO(8), the spin group The spin group has an outer automorphism known as a It is clearly an automorphism and we see that it is an outer automorphism, so not a conjugation.
It is simple that Triality takes Then SO(8) is This is a result of applying triality to the fact that SO(8) is generated by the bimultiplications. We also see there is a 2:1 map from both triples (a, b, c) and (-a, -b, c) to c. This is then a representation of Spin(8), the double-cover of SO(8). The triples (a,b,c) for which c fixes 1 form Spin(7), the double-cover of SO(7).
If we apply the Cayley-Dickson process to octonions and then repeat this continuously we find a chain of c-algebras with dimension 16, 32, 64,..., It is important to remember that these hypercomplex number systems are not division algebras. The 16-dimensional c-algebra is known as the algebra of
This algebra is non-commutative, non-associative, non-alternative and is not a normed division algebra. So it is possible for It is power associative
Each element can be represented as
or by applying the Cayley-Dickson process. Take two octonions a, b and the sedenion s The multiplication of sedenions is given by
The multiplication of the two sedenion elements Summation is over the permutations of the sedenion cycle,
We now explore very briefly a relationship between division algebras and Lie alge-bras. The Freudenthal-Tits Magic Square is an array of algebras. The entries of the array are the result of the Jordan algebras of 3 Any algebra which satisfies the identity a
We can extend this to a Freudenthal rectangle, a 4
The entries are all Lie algebras formed by the operation This operation is for Recall that for a ring R its derivation Der(R) is a mapping
Remember that a Lie A semisimple Lie algebra is a Lie algebra formed of the direct sums of simple Lie algebras. The classical complex simple Lie algebras are A semisimple Lie algebra is a Lie algebra formed of the direct sums of simple Lie algebras. It is also given by the following theorem [V74, H2003, B89].
Theorem 17. A complex Lie algebra is semisimple iff it is isomorphic to the com-plexification of the Lie algebra of a connected, compact matrix Lie group
So we know that Lastly,
A
The elements of
Theorem 18. Every irreducible root system is isomorphic to one of:
The algebras formed by the operation defined by Tits, above, are the exceptional Lie algebras and a few corresponding to he classical root systems, see [V74, H2003, B89].
Thus concludes our brief foray into the world of normed division algebras. An interesting fact to close here is that quaternion representations of rotation groups may be fundamental to the underlying structure of our universe. The standard model insists on an infinite Euclidean space created by inflation. The plasma that filled space shortly after the big bang fluctuates in density, causing temperature fluctuation in the Cosmic Microwave Background radiation. The standard model predicts these fluctuations, but on larger scales they are not detected.
Consider the 4-manifold There are a few explanations for the missing fluctuations but the simplest is that a spherical universe will not support large scale fluctuations, analogous to the way an unit circle will only support wavelengths The observable evidence is inconclusive with To recognise a spherical universe we must find which spaces are possible.
The operation is similar to our construction of the 24-Cell. We find that the possible symmetry groups are the cyclic group The corresponding spaces S
We quickly tour the area of Lie groups and algebras in greater detail. The collection of classical Lie groups is made up of the general and special linear group, orthogonal groups, the unitary groups and the symplectic groups. They are all examples of
Theorem 19. Every matrix Lie group G is a Lie group.
The proof is given in most good Lie theory texts.
Example 4.  Lie groups.
 This can be shown by using methods similar to above.
iii)
 We  G has an identity and an inverse for each element. The product is smooth as is the inverse element map, hence G is a Lie group.
A matrix Lie group is
Example 5. U(n) is a If A is unitary, the column vectors are orthonormal.
Similar idea for the other classical Lie groups.
A matrix Lie group We say G is simply connected if every loop in G can be shrunk continuously to a point in G, as well as G being connected.
Now a Lie algebra of a Lie group
Theorem 20.  Then
Proof:
We are familiar enough with differential topology to recall that Now, we let The map So Then But We also have But
This gives a neat way to calculate the Lie algebra of a given Lie group since we see that
Example 6.
The The Lie algebra of a matrix Lie group The classical Lie groups have their own Lie algebras; we have already stated which are the classical Lie algebras and which Lie groups they correspond to. It can be shown that the Lie algebra of a matrix Lie group is a real Lie algebra. Think of the more abstract definition of a Lie algebra, in terms of Lie brackets. If V is a finite-dimensional real vector space, then
Theorem 21. Let g be a finite-dimensional real Lie algebra. The bracket operation on g can be extended uniquely to gc, its complexification as a real vector space, making gc into a complex Lie algebra, the complexification of g.
Proof:
We see that Since the operation is skew-symmetric, it is complex linear in both factors. So we verify We see
The Jacobi identity hold for It holds for The identity then holds for The same argument is made for y and z.
Uniqueness is obvious since the bilinear bracket operation must be
The classical Lie algebras are classified by Theorem 17. Then the classical root systems