In this essay a review is given on the pedogenesis of the British Isles (excluding Ireland) in the time span from Neolithic to the Iron Age. The following chapter summarizes the development of Man in the British Isles and his influences on the vegetation. The next chapters describe the different major soil types of Britain and the impact of man on soils and vegetation for the two distinct regions of lowland and upland Britain. The last chapter gives a conclusion on pedogenesis on the British Isles with focus on vegetation for the relevant period of time.
The distribution and extension of soils in Britain can be seen in the following figure. The structure of this essay refers to the approximate boundary of the highland zone.
Mesolithic Man had a largely animal product based diet, and agriculture was unknown. He possibly influenced the vegetation through planting of hazel (Corylus avellana), but did not cause major changes such as soil erosion.
At the end of Mesolithic and beginning of Neolithic started the process of man made deforestation and the onset of agriculture. This more settled way of life was probably caused by an increase of the population and decrease of wild animal resources. Early Neolithic in 7,200 BP brought major woodland clearance which continued through the Bronze Age and later epochs (Evans 1993; Piggott 1981). Woodland clearing may have caused the ceasing of tufa formation in Southern England after about 6000-5000 BP (Evans 1993; Preece and Bridgeland 1998). On the European Continent similar development arose (Schmidtchen and Bork 2001).
The spreading of farming practises over Europe happened from south-east to north-west from the beginning of the 9th millennium BP and reaching the Channel coasts of the continent by the middle or second half of the 5th millennium BP. All archaeological cultures involved were cultivating cereals (Triticum monococcum, T. dicoccum and  Hordeum hexastichon), using stones and raising domesticated animals (cattle, sheep, goats, pigs and dogs) in various proportions.
Neolithic agricultural techniques and cultivated cereal species reached Ireland in 5750 BP before they came to Britain in 5300 BP. By 2500 BC agriculture was the dominant land use system in most of lowland Britain (Simmons 2001). The first tools for soil cultivation were the hoe and spade. The first evidence found for the usage of ardmarks were disturbed soil profiles detected at several sites (Waylands Smith in Berkshire c. 2820 bc; Horslip c. 3240 bc and South Street c. 2820 bc in Wiltshire and several others in that period) (Piggott 1981; Preece and Bridgeland 1998).
The expansion of open habitat taxa such as plantain (Plantago lanceolata), grasses (Poaceae spp.) and dock (Rumex spp.) are indicating farming and grazing activities (Piggott 1981; Wiltshire and Edwards 1998). Neolithic man took influence on the tree cover not only through burning and felling trees, but also through feeding domesticated animals with leaves of lopped trees (Edwards 1993). Nevertheless, the Elm decline did not happen due to the activity of Man, but due to the spreading of a fungal disease with the coleoptera Scolytus scolytus as vector (Chambers 1993). The grazing in clearance sites was common and prevented woodland regeneration. Thus, clearance supported more bracken, grasses and on acid soil, heather.
In the early Neolithic the human population was increasing strongly, supported by the favourable climate of West Zone F II and by good crop yields due to the colonisation of fertile new wood soils, ash fertilisation, the introduction of new crops with few pests and diseases and few competition through weeds.
In the mid Neolithic the climate changed from West Zone F II (Atlantic) to F III (Sub-boreal), which led the population of England face less pleasant conditions. This caused a significant decrease of the population. Evidence is given for the abandonment of stony upland soil fields due to reduced fertility, erosion and leaching effects caused by increased precipitation (Favies Mortlock, Boardmanal. 1997). By that time the mixed Oak forest of the climatic optimum of the Atlantic phase had been in part cleared (Wiltshire and Edwards 1998).
Soil fertility losses through erosion may have led to the introduction of manuring fields from the second millennium BC onwards (Fowler 1981).
In the late Neolithic the population stabilized again, and food production took place on mixed farming systems. In this period many aspects of our present landscape have their origin. Increasing animal husbandry caused the introduction of continental European weed species such as Arcticum spp., but also the grassland vegetation of the present was formed. This vegetation is highly adapted to either animal based selection in pasture grassland or selection by the type and frequency of mowing for hay as winter fodder in meadows. The invention of the sickle was the major step for the creation of meadows.
Most of the British lowland terrain was covered by deciduous forest prior to Neolithic times, which favoured a nutrient recycling process and resulted in little decline in base content. These soils were mainly brown earths on well-drained sites and gley soils on badly or slow drained sites (Courtney, Curtis, Trudgill 1976). The woodland clearance and burning of Neolithic and later times led to an initial increase of plant nutrients through ash fertilisation and high turnover of organic matter due to ploughing and soil aeration. But the burning caused as much as 70% loss of vegetation bound Nitrogen, Sulphur and Phospor into the atmosphere.
This nutrient boost was used up within a couple of years. Subsequent land use practices led to nutrient losses. Nutrient export (particularly Nitrogen and Phosphor) took mainly place due to grazing combined with stable/kraal husbandry, hay making without fertilizing and crop harvesting. Leaching, the loss of water-soluble soil components due to precipitation occurred and caused decalcification and further loss of nutrients. Run-off was also happening in winter, when precipitation was high and fields lay bare. As much as 50% vertical losses of Potassium, Magnesium and Calcium can occur.
The Man made deforestation mentioned in the previous chapters also happened in upland Britain. The climate in these- in their soil morphology more diverse regions- however is influencing soils in a different ways. Due to increasing altitude an increased precipitation occurs, with increased quantity, frequency and duration compared to lowland Britain. Side effects are less solar radiation due to cloud cover, lower mean temperature and stronger winds. These conditions shorten the length of growing season for agricultural crops, thus forcing Neolithic and present day Man to make land use predominantly in form of pasture and livestock cultivation, and if cereals are grown it is mainly barley.
The described conditions influence British upland soils stronger than the lowland soils, which nevertheless are also affected in similar ways. The effects on soils are:
Archaeological surveys underneath Bronze Age barrows have revealed that prior to the Bronze Age upland soils were essentially brown earths or gleyed brown earths. The soil was not podzolised, indicating that podzolisation happened later (Courtney, Curtisal. 1976).
Pollen analysis also indicates that prior to the Bronze Age the vegetation was deciduous forest, and the nowadays dominating heather vegetation has developed in post-bronze age times. An acidifying process took place under the heather vegetation, combined with a loss of soil structure and destruction of nutrients in organic horizons caused by burning. This led to soil deterioration and the search for new and virgin forest soils.
Present British soils are largely influenced by human activities in their succession. The clearance of woodland caused without doubt the greatest environmental change of prehistoric times. The process of leaching, decarbonisation and podzolisation is a natural process in regions with high precipitation, but prehistoric wood clearance has increased the speed of transformation and expansion in all parts of the British Isles and large parts of Europe.
The present types of present vegetation communities have their origin in prehistoric times:
Most open habitat vegetation communities were formed or began to develop then, e.g. chalk grasslands, heath, raised bogs or moor. Excepted from this development were the glacial tundra vegetation, bare rock areas and other for human activities not appropriate locations.
Due to in the Neolithic "invented" land use forms plant communities such as the meadows, pastures and rural flora communities have evolved. They heavily depend on the land use system, e.g. regular cuts in meadows, soil compaction and food selection of livestock in pasture, ploughing and fallow in field systems, heathland management with fire. For the selection of settlement areas the role of loess deposits was less important than in continental Europe, due to the comparably small extension of loess deposits. The current woodland types of Europe were also selected by human activities, see Figure 7.