This essay aims on comparing two ancient oasis settlements of Oman in regard to their sustainability and land use management over the millennia. The irrigation infrastructure needed for any agricultural production in this xeric environment is based on aini-aflaj (sing. falaj) systems, referring to canals that convey water from a spring at the foot of a mountain to agricultural fields (Siebert, Hseral. 2005). A research project was carried out by an international and interdisciplinary research team of agronomists, archaeologists and urban planners of the Sultan Quaboos University, Oman and German universities in the period from 2000 to 2005. The agronomic part of the research project was focusing on the following questions:
Due to the erratic and scarce nature of precipitation in the area of study, genesis and survival of these oases very much depends on the existence of large and well buffered natural resources of water. How is this established and maintained?
The irrigation system and soil properties of these Omani oases are established in a way that salinisation of the terrace soils is avoided even under intensive and long utilisation. How could these agriculturally intensive oasis systems stay productive for millennia with only a moderate build-up of toxic salt levels despite extremely xeric moisture regimes?
Are the mountain oases of Oman sinks for the plant nutrients Nitrogen (N), Phospor (P) and Potassium (K)? Which role does the transfer of animal excrements from the surrounding areas to the fields play? To what extent does Medicago sativa contribute to the N-supply of fields?
The geomorphologic setting of Balad Seet provides a reliable and well-buffered water supply necessary for intensive irrigated year-round date and crop cultivation. Maqta water supply is less well buffered; this is reflected by a different land use system with focus on agro pastoralism and to a lesser extent date palm production.
The man-made terrace soils of the oases are built up in a way that salinisation is avoided. Salt built-up is prevented by a particle size distribution favouring drainage, high levels of soil organic carbon providing good soil structure and a high irrigation water quality.
The oases in fact are large temporary sinks for nutrients until they are lost through leaching or evaporation into the atmosphere. Both oases depend on a nutrient supply delivered through animal manure. At Balad Seet the influence of external inputs is reflected in the nutrient balance. The amount of biomass and nitrogen provided through N 2-fixation of alfalfa is exceptionally high due to optimal growing conditions. Maqta still is relatively untouched by modern life, and reflected by its nutrient balance external inputs seem to be low.
Oasis agriculture in Oman has an ancient history but given the rapid transformation of this country's economy heavily influenced by petroleum exploitation since the 1970s it is rapidly changing in structure and extent. Hundreds of traditional aflaj-based settlements have been abandoned since and a millennia-old mode of life with its cultural and genetic resources is threatened by extinction. Whether these systems can withstand the challenges posed by overpopulation, rapidly raising labour costs and the heavy use of mineral fertilizers instead of manure has to be seen in the future.