Total body weight gain has a typical rate of 2kg (4.5lb) in the first three months and then about 0.25 kg (0.5lb) per week for the rest of the pregnancy A normal weight gain for most healthy women is 11-15kg, averaging at 12.5kg
Increasing energy In addition, energy is needed to produce colustrum (a very rich special secretion) from the breasts near the end of pregnancy, there is greater physical effort and extra fat is normally accumulated and used up during breast feeding.
On average a pregnant woman's daily energy requirements go up by as much as 80,000kcal (285kcal/day)or 300MJ This value is lower the less physical activity you have.
It is recommended you aim to gradually increase the amount of food slightly during the first three months, and more during the 2
Note, however, that eating large amounts in later stages may be difficult due to the enlarged uterus hence it is advisable to eat more during the first two trimesters. Also a reduction in physical activity whilst pregnant might mean less extra food is required.
Although it is important to stay well nourished during and after pregnancy, putting on an excessive amount of weight may lead to complications such as high blood pressure and post- pregnancy obesity.
You should ensure you eat a well balanced diet with emphasis on increase in high quality protein (an extra 30 g a day ) , iron ,calcium and vitamins especially folate .
This may be done by eating balanced amounts of lean red meat, cheese , milk, and yoghurt, at least one portion of oily fish a week, pulses, cereals( especially wholemeal) and five or more portions of fruits and vegetables everyday .
During the 40 weeks you are pregnant, your body requires approximately 900mg of iron. This equates to approximately 3mg a day and is needed for the increased blood volume, iron stores of the foetus and to compensate for blood loss during child birth, and to prevent anaemia.
During pregnancy, although there is increased iron absorption still not enough is absorbed from the intestines and greater amounts need to be taken in.
It is best to obtain iron from iron-rich foods such as red meat (avoiding liver) or iron fortified cereals, green leafy vegetables and legumes. If this is unfeasible you may take iron tablets although these sometimes cause abdominal discomfort or constipation. Take care to get professional guidance on safe limits of iron supplements as excessive amounts are harmful.
Yes,
Folic acid is essential for the proper growth of the nervous system and to prevent neural tube defects. An increased level (0.4mg/day) is especially needed during the first twelve weeks of pregnancy Supplementation diminishes incidence of neural tube defects
Vitamin C tablets may be taken if you prefer not to have a few glasses of good quality orange juice a day also not more than 10mg vitamin B6 may be taken. Do not use vitamin supplements except under specialist supervision as excessive Vitamin A may lead to damage of the baby.
Although you theoretically require higher vitamin intake whilst pregnant, physiological changes occur which cause more vitamins and minerals to be absorbed. For example, calcium absorption from blood goes up 10% to 40% or more during pregnancy. This necessitates additional Vitamin D (10
Alcohol, except in very small amounts, may damage the developing baby.
Swordfish, marlin and fresh tuna due to risk of methylmercury contamination of these fish from seawater. You should however aim to eat at least two portions of fish a week one of which should be oily fish. Wild salmon is less likely to have harmful levels of contaminants
Liver as it contains large amounts of Vitamin A
Soft cheese, soft eggs and p
If you or a member of your family suffers from allergies like hay fever or eczema do not eat foods with peanuts as the developing baby may become sensitised to peanut antigens.
Have caffeine, herbal teas and artificial sweeteners in moderation.
Definition
Neural Tube defects: Theses are severe congenital malformations of the central nervous system that occur as a result of the failure of the embryonic neural tube to close normally within the first 4 weeks of conception