UHT is a continuous process which involves rapid heating to high temperatures about 140C holding for a short period of time (1-10 seconds) and cooling rapidly to produce a sterile product
The UHT process is usually carried out above 135C and can be used for any product provided it's pumpable e.g. custard.
It consists of 4 steps
The product is then placed in aseptic packaging that is commercially sterile and has a shelf life of approximately 6 months
(The aseptic packaging is sterilized using 30-35% hydrogen peroxide at 70-80C; this decomposes to give harmless oxygen and water afterwards)
Prior to milk treatment the tube is sterilized by pumping hot water at 130C for 30 minutes .Steam / water at 140 C which is cooled before being released to the atmosphere .
Safety of the product is key.
The Z value for Clostridium botulinum, one of the most resistant pathogenic organisms is 10C. Typically processors aim for a spoilage rate of less than 1 in 10,000
Alternative processing conditions would be 131C for 18 sec
141C for 1.8 sec
Ideally the processor would want a product that does not cause a lot of fouling, and which has little sedimentation with no gelation of the product after processing
The first aim is a major problem because of high temperatures used often result in a great deal of fouling
Steam tables are important because they enable one to establish an equilibrium temperature - pressure where the milk is heated to the necessary temperature without it boiling (Milk boils at less than 100C) one of the goals during processing.
"The philosophy of UHT processing should be based on minimising microbial spoilage by understanding and controlling the process (Lewis 2003)."
Good quality milk should show no flocculation in 80% alcohol solution, the raw milk sample tested showed slight curdling in an 80% solution of alcohol, it was still however considered stable and the running time of the sterilizer was not shortened.
The mean freezing point depression of milk is often quoted as -0.535H, which is taken as an appropriate standard for estimation of added water. (Coveney L, 1993)
Raw milk gave a value of 517mC which warrants no action according to the Code of practice for the assessment of milk quality (Joint committee (1985) Code of practice for the Assessment of milk quality) UHT milk however gave a reading of 516mC which warrants a warning letter then a check of the premises if repeated.
The in-container sterilised product is of lower quality because the product heats and cools relatively slowly; furthermore the temperatures are limited by the internal pressure generated.
Selection of the optimum equipment , raw materials and processing conditions is a key factor in the success of any UHT treatment .