One of the main areas of technological advancement in the last thirty years has been in the area of flat screen displays. From microwaves to mobile phones and calculators to clocks, flat screens are becoming somewhat ubiquitous in society. In a world where mobility is now equally as important as quality, flat screens have made the step from industry implementations to a recreational consumer market - from the board room to the living room. Now flat screens are second only to the traditional Cathode Ray Tube (CRT) displays in the television market. Liquid crystal displays account for over 80% of the current varieties of flat screens available and so I believe it is appropriate to dedicate this report to this fundamental area of flat screen technology: the advantages, the mechanisms and the physics behind the flat screen phenomenon.
There is an ever-growing list of advantages for having a flat screen television as opposed to the conventional CRT displays. As the list grows and the price of the technology falls, this relatively new technology becomes more and more attractive.
The main advantage of flat screens over the standard CRT displays is mobility. CRT displays involve the use of a large electron gun situated at the read of the set which fires electrons at certain points on the phosphor-coated screen. This causes the phosphor to glow and hence light appear in that area of the screen. The colour of the particular area of phosphor that the electron is fired at determines the colour of the resultant light on the screen.
An LCD involves a more simplistic setup with a thin layer of liquid crystals encased between two glass plates. Behind this there is either a small backlight or alternatively a mirror to provide light for the screen to make use of to convey images. This means that the thickness of such LCD's is small enough that they are feasible for applications of any size and scale. It is for this reason that they are now widespread in small electrical devices where size is paramount.
Another key benefit of flat screens is that the power consumption is considerably less than that of CRT's. As mentioned above, the CRT contains an electron gun which not only takes up considerable space in the unit, but also requires a large amount of power. The two main consumers of power in an LCD are an induced electric field across the liquid crystals, which is a result of a small change in voltage and, in televisions, a backlight that is required to compensate for light intensity lost during polarization. Consequently the power usage in an LCD is considerably less.
Currently the only drawback of flat screen displays is the cost. However as production is increased for the ever-expanding market, the price of construction falls and so flat panel displays seem more attractive. To understand the benefits of flat screens the key principles behind the technology must be investigated.
Before understanding how specific properties of light are utilised in LCD's, ideas regarding the polarization and manipulation of light must be outlined.
The previous sections have dealt with how light is manipulated and passes through crystals with specific properties to display an image on the screen. Now using this knowledge of the structure and operation of LCD's the creation of areas on a screen with no light can be discussed.
When an electric field is passed through a liquid crystal the mesogens attempt to align along the field lines due to a small induced dipole moment. This is caused by the positively charged protons and negatively charged electrons moving to opposite ends of each rod-like mesogen in line with the electric field.
In the context of an LCD the electrodes are situated at the front and back of the display. When an electric field is applied, it causes the mesogens that originally lie parallel to the screen to tilt in an attempt to lie perpendicular to the screen and in the direction of the electric field lines that go from one electrode at the front to the other at the back of the display. This ruins the helical alignment of the mesogens that is required in order to rotate the polarization state of the light and at the extreme where the mesogens have tilted by 90 There is no twist to enable birefringence to occur and so once the light reaches the back polarizer it has not undergone the necessary phase change in order to pass through the polarizer, so that part of the screen is devoid of light.
The magnitude of the induced electric field determines exactly how much the mesogens tilt and therefore how much birefringence can occur before the light reaches the back polarizer. The amount of light that passes through the liquid crystal perpendicular to the director, This means that the amount of birefringence reduces as the tilt angle increases.
Figure 6 shows the increase in tilt angle as a greater voltage is applied and so the electric field grows stronger. Figure 7 shows the percentage of light transmitted by the display decreasing as the voltage is increased and the mesogens attempt to align horizontally. The two lines signify the voltages at which the pixel is deemed to be 'on' and 'off'. The maximum transmission percentage is only 50% since linearly polarized light is used, which necessitates the use of a backlight.
LCD's are divided up into rows and columns of pixels. Each of these pixels contains all of the necessary components to allow or prevent light from passing through that small portion of the screen. Addressing is the method used to selectively turn off arbitrary pixels by passing an electric field through them. Small scale LCD's use direct addressing where each part of the display has its own drive circuit. This is not feasible for displays that involve a large number of pixels, for example in a television or laptop screen there may be thousands of pixels (and also sub-pixels for each of the 3 constituent colours) that need to be addressed. In this case multiplex addressing is used. This is where pixels are addressed by their row and column with one electrode per row and one electrode per column so that for a 10x10 display 20 drive circuits are required as opposed to 100 if direct addressing was used.
The physical mechanisms and theoretical principles of LCD's have been discussed. Advantages over CRT screens have been argued and the fundamental ideas of liquid crystal technology and light manipulation via polarization and birefringence have been outlined. The structure of an LCD has been built up referring to the liquid crystal layer, the electrodes and the polarizers and how each layer is used in the operation of the screen. Finally the methods of addressing the pixels have been summarised for small and large scale displays.