Discourse Analysis looks at language in terms of social interaction. According to Michael McCarthy (1991), "discourse analysis is a vast subject area within linguistics, encompassing [...] the analysis of spoken and written language over and above concerns such as the structure of the clause or sentence" (p. 32). However, this paper focuses only on written discourse by analysing a text based on two main approaches: cohesion and thematization. Particularly, the discussion begins with a brief outline of the context of the sample, followed by an exposition of the two approaches based on background literature. Then, it moves on to a detailed analysis of the text and finally concludes with the limitations of the analysis.
To begin with, the features that are important with regards to the context of discourse are the following: channel, formality, purpose, relationship between the addressor and the addressee, topic and setting.
Here, the channel is written and has the form of a formal letter including the addresses' full address, the date, and the formulaic opening and closing expressions: "Dear Mr Miller" and "Yours Sincerely". However, it is a genuine charity letter signed by a well-known game show host celebrity, aiming to personalize it and sensitise the addressee to provide financial help to the leukaemic children.
What is striking about its format is that it has a title and a subtitle accompanied by a visual image of two children. The title is in bold letters that easily catch the reader's attention, whereas the words "children" and "leukaemia" are capitalized, stressing the children's difficult state. The subtitle "inaugurated by Princess" gives value to those people's work and the phrase "no 298405" reveals that it is really a general letter sent to many people, yet easy to become personalized by the addition of the addressee's name. Finally, the names given in the right column, as well as the "P.S." and the sketch next to the signature add to the letter's general purpose of persuasion.
This part of the paper presents a literary review of the first approach, followed by a justification for its selection. It then concludes with the analysis of the text.
There are many texts that, although they are grammatically correct, are not cohesive. Such texts lack connectivity between sequences and so readers face difficulty in deciphering their meaning. As McCarthy (1991) supports, "English offers a [...] set of options for creating surface links between the clauses and sentences of a text otherwise known as cohesion" (p. 25). In addition, Halliday and Hasan's (1976) system (as cited in Hatch, 1992, p. 223) "distinguishes five major types of grammatical cohesive ties: reference, substitution, ellipsis, conjunction, and lexical ties." These ties as Brown and Yule (1983) acknowledge: "bind a text together" (p. 191).
As Thompson (1996) points out, "reference is a set of grammatical recourses that allow the speaker to indicate whether something is being repeated from somewhere earlier in the text" (p. 180). It is binary: "the first [...] is known as exophoric ('pointing outwards') whereas the second is anaphoric ('pointing inwards') (Thompson, 1996, p. 181). The second cohesive tie is ellipsis, where "a clause [...] may be presupposed at a subsequent place in the text by the device of positive omission" (Halliday, 1985, p. 288). The third, on the other hand, is substitution that takes place when "an expression may simply be replaced by another in the text" (Brown and Yule, 1983, p. 201). The fourth type of cohesive tie is conjunction. According to Hatch (1992), "here are several different kinds of conjunctive relations: additive [...], adversative [...], causal [...] and temporal" (p. 225). The last type of cohesion is lexical cohesion. According to Brown and Yule (1983), "cohesion may be derived from lexical relationships like hyponymy [...], part-whole [...], collocability [...], clausal substitution [...], comparison [...] and by syntactic repetition" (p. 194).
Before proceeding to the analysis of the text based on cohesion, it is necessary to mention the reasons for selecting it. Firstly, as it is clear by the pertinent review, many linguists have studied this approach and perceive it as one of the main approaches for analysing written discourse. Furthermore, cohesion offers an insight into the meaning relations between the various elements of a text, as knowledge of the grammatical relations between words is not enough. Finally, according to Halliday (1985), "in order to construct discourse we need to be able to establish [...] relations that may involve elements of any extent [...] (and) this cannot be achieved by grammatical structure" (p. 288).
Thematization, focusing on the order of information in a sentence, is a different way of analysing a written text. The theme can be considered as the point of departure of the message (Halliday, 1985, p. 38). It can also be seen as that "which locates and orients the clause within its own context" (as cited in Thompson, 1996, p. 143). Halliday (1985) goes even further to provide a more extended definition of theme stating that " the theme of any clause, [...] extends up to [and includes] the topical Theme" (p. 56).
There are several types of themes such as: subject or adjunct themes, thematizing structures and predicated themes. A theme can have three parts: a textual, an interpersonal and an ideational one. According to Matthiessen & Painter (1997), "the textual and interpersonal stages to the Theme may or may not be present" (p. 24). When they are present the order is "textual + interpersonal + ideational" (McCarthy, 1983, p.58). Also a theme can have three different statuses: unmarked (following a normal word order), marked (where something is put forward into the slot), and enhanced in thematizing structures.
The rheme, on the other hand, is the comment: "what the speaker states about, or in regard to, the starting point of the utterance" (as cited in Brown & Yule, 1983, pp. 126-7). As Thompson (1996) suggests, " the rheme provides the content, the main information that the writer or speaker wants the addressee to know" (p. 165). The rheme of the first sentence organizes the progression of topics in the structure of the text. In general, the linking between theme and rheme helps the writer to explain the topic organization.
First and foremost, the progression of a text is critically dependent upon the writer's thematic choices. So, any changes in them, signal a change in his perspective and way of looking at the text. Therefore, it is extremely important for a reader to know how to analyse a text in terms of this approach, in order to understand and evaluate the writer's ideas. Also, as Halliday (1985) reports, " the choice of clause Themes [...] constitutes what is often known as 'the method of development' of the text" (p. 62). As a conclusion, "analysing the thematic structure of a text gives us an insight into its texture" (Halliday, 1985, p. 67).
The text is divided into four paragraphs. The theme of the first paragraph introduces the topic of the whole text. The phrase "life...show" (l.1) links the whole paragraph back to the concept of life with its unanswered questions that make us wonder. The first rheme, in addition, completes the theme by commenting on life's unexpected nature. In this rheme, there is a sub-theme "we" and a sub-rheme "still ... answers" (ll. 2,3). The second sentence, however, has a more specific theme, which initiates the problem of leukaemia, whereas the rheme analyses its seriousness. Therefore, the writer makes a general comment by setting the frame of his topic and now moves on in its analysis.
In the second paragraph, in contrast, there is a change of topic from "life" to "I". Here, the addressor expresses his awareness that there are people who work hard to find a cure. The transition in the development of the text is very smooth and the clauses are nicely linked together. The first rheme, "my friends" (l. 7) is picked up by the next theme, emphasizing people's work in that institute. Picked up theme as Lock (1996) claims, " is a thematized constituent [...] later picked up by a pronoun in an unmarked position in the clause" (p. 227). The rheme following it, consisting of many sub-themes, comments on people's need for financial help.
In the third paragraph, and having stated the situation, the author moves on to explain the purpose of his letter. The theme introduces the topic of the paragraph, which is about persuading the addressee to sell the tickets. The rheme is part of an interrogative clause. Since it is a yes/no question, according to Halliday (1985), "the element that functions as Theme is the element that embodies the expression of polarity" (p. 47). In addition, the next clause provides information about the prizes. The theme changes, whereas the rheme is picked up by the previous one. Finally, the paragraph ends with a complex clause, where theme and rheme are picked up from the previous clauses, emphasizing the writer's request.
In conclusion, the last paragraph states the benefits that will arise from selling the tickets. It starts with a picked up multiple theme, "By...you" (l. 18), followed by a rheme: "will ensure...treatments" (ll. 18-21) that expresses a causal-conditional relationship to it, and is later picked up by the next theme (l.21). Here, the letter reaches its conclusion. Thus, the writer manages to state the problem, develop his argumentation and express his request in a rather convincing way. (For further evidence see Appendix 2).
To sum up, the primary purpose of this paper was to examine how the two main approaches of written discourse (cohesion and thematization) shed light on the way discourse works. However, there is another related approach to discourse analysis that this paper does not refer to, called clause relationships. This approach constitutes a first limitation of this study. A second limitation is that thematization brought up several difficulties in identifying the theme and rheme of each clause. The instances were not always clear-cut and thus allowed for various interpretations. However, besides these limitations, this paper leads to future study of other approaches of discourse analysis and the possible pedagogic implications these carry.