The notion of syllable is one of the key issues in Phonetics and Phonology as it determines the structure and comprehensible production of speech. Its significance has led many linguists to develop several theories for its structure such as: onset - rhyme, mora theory, body - coda organization and flat structure among others. The purpose of the essay is firstly to provide a critical evaluation of the system for syllable structure presented in Roach (2000) by comparing it to flat structure, and secondly to discuss the importance of a good understanding of syllable and its structure in pronunciation teaching in a language classroom situation.
There are two main patterns governing the syllable structure: a) sonority hierarchy and b) phonotactics. To start with, every syllable contains a vowel which is the most sonorous element (Katamba, 1989, p. 169) and which can be preceded or followed by consonants according to the sonority hierarchy. As it is stated "less sonorous sounds preceding the nucleus are assigned to the initial C - element (...) and those following it are assigned to the other C - element" (Katamba, 1989, p. 159). Apart from this pattern, syllables are governed by a set of phonological consonants which determine "the possible combinations of phonemes" (Roach, 2000, p. 71). However, different linguists find different sets of restrictions underlying the syllable and thus form different theories about its structure. One such theory is flat structure.
Its basic implication is that "each of the segments is an immediate constituent of the syllable node, with no intervening nodes" (Ewen &amp; Hulst, 2001, p. 129). Its proponents have observed that the vowel can be easily attached to the preceding consonants as well as to the following ones. However, instead of favoring one aspect against the other they claim that "co-occurrence restrictions holding between the nucleus and preceding elements of the syllable [are] as common as co-occurrence restrictions holding between the nucleus and the following elements" (Clements &amp; Keyser, 1983, p. 20). (For more reference see Appendix). Overall, this view has been very strongly criticized by other theories such as the Onset Rhyme theory that is analyzed next.
According to this theory the consonants occurring before the vowel (nucleus) are called onset whereas those coming after it are called coda. Besides, the restrictions between peak and coda are noticeably more common (Fudge, 1987, p. 361) and the grouping of "peak &amp; coda together [is called] (...) the rhyme of the syllable" (Giegerich, 1992, p. 138). In fact, most linguists seem to coincide to this view and elaborate on it. Besides, as Clements and Keyser (1983) admit, "a few of these constraints could, perhaps, be regarded as accidental gaps" (p. 21).
Roach (2000) develops a system for analyzing the possible combinations of English phonemes. He starts by describing the segments that can be part of the onset: a) "zero onset", (...) b) "one consonant" (...) and c) "consonant cluster" (p. 71) and then moves on to describe the coda and its constituents parts: a) "zero coda", (...) b) "final consonant", (...) and c) "consonant final cluster") (p. 73). Finally, he presents the syllable structure according to Onset - Rhyme theory.
After examining the syllable structure at a theoretical level, the paper moves on to discuss the importance of a good understanding of syllable and syllable structure in pronunciation teaching.
In conclusion, the first half of this paper provided a critical evaluation of Roach's system for syllable structure, whereas the second half presented the importance of syllable and its structure in pronunciation teaching. However, one of its basic limitations is that there was no analysis of other theories of syllable structure such as mora theory or body-coda organization that could give us a better insight to syllable structure and a more critical view to Roach's system. Furthermore, the reference to the pedagogic implications of syllable and its structure was limited to the teaching of stress, vowels and consonant clusters. However, the importance of syllable could also be seen in teaching intonation and syllabic consonants. Nevertheless, the essay has brought to the surface many interesting views about the syllable and syllable structure and thus leads to further investigation of similar issues one being the teaching of pronunciation: what it includes and how it can be succeeded.