In this context, the present study aims to briefly revise the literature on adult education and critically analyse the current learning approach adopted by ISNAR, a division of IFPRI, since the organization "seeks to foster policy, institutional, and organizational change to enhance the impact of innovations on food security, poverty reduction, economic growth, and sustainable development" (IFPRI's Website).
Learning and Capacity Strengthening (LCS) is one of the programmes carried out by ISNAR Division and seeks to generate
The following sections of this study will give an overview of the existing learning approaches, the current approach undertaken by ISNAR and suggestions for improving it.
"Adult Education is the field of educational science (pedagogics) that involves the conceptualisation and research of adult education and learning" (Arnold, 2005:7). Adult education is an integral part of life-long education and can contribute decisively to economic and cultural development, social progress and world peace, as well as the development of educational systems (Townsend Coles, 1977:158).
According to Arnold (2005:9), adult education deals with the (1) fundamentals (theories); (2) development (history); (3) need as well as contents, and processes (didactics); (4) the ways and forms of learning (methodology); (5) the individual learners ("learning subjects") with their biographical, socio-psychological and socio-cultural background as well as their respective adult learning acquisition and interpretation models (psychology of adult-age learning, adult socialisation research); (6) the addressed and target groups (research on environment/milieu target learners and participants); (7) the legal and institutional status of adult education; and the (8) general framework conditions and development trends in further education policies and at the international level.
The capacity strengthening programme of ISNAR offers short-term learning courses on agricultural research management issues, targeting mature professionals (adults) with high education, working on the private or public sector, mainly in developing countries. Its programmes are in line with the world's demand for capacity strengthening projects, as indicated by UNESCO.
When UN designed the Millennium Development Goals (MDG), it did not explicitly indicated adult education, but without empowering the policy-makers, national professionals, and researchers, the goals will not be achieved. One of the main donors for educational projects, the World Bank, has been currently funding 157 projects on education, in 83 countries, committing US$33 billion in loans and credits for education. It includes primary education, formal/informal education, long life learning, short and long term training. The literature shows that there is a consensus about investing in education as a way to bring development, improve livelihood and reduce poverty.
The learning approach currently used by ISNAR is the training-of-trainers (ToT) approach, which is based on experiential learning theory (Kolb and Fry, 1975; McCaffery, 1986) and is participatory in design. It is a learner-centred approach involving active experience followed by a process of reviewing, reflecting, and applying what has been learned through the experience.
The current approach undertaken by ISNAR is entirely based on the experimental learning proposed by Kolb. But not all writers agree with Kolb's theory. Rogers, for example points out that "learning includes goals, purposes, intentions, choice and decision-making, and it is not at all clear where these elements fit into the learning cycle" (Rogers, 1996:108).
According to Jeffs and Smith (1999), a number of criticisms can be made of the Kolb model. It pays insufficient attention to the process of reflection (see Boud et al 1985); the claims made for the four different learning styles are extravagant (Jarvis 1987; Tennant 1997); the model takes very little account of different cultural experiences/conditions; the idea of stages or steps does not sit well with the reality of thinking (Dewey 1933); and the empirical support for the model is weak (Jarvis 1987; Tennant 1997).
Loynes (1998) indicates that Kolb's theory is based on research measuring the non-conscious development of psycho-motor skills. According to the author, the evidence that other kinds of learning follow this pattern is weak.
Even thou the current approach undertaken by ISNAR receive critiques from the literature, the approach has been successfully disseminated among researchers from developing world, as one of the most successful approach in the CGIAR, based on its capacity to develop skills among the workshop participants. Based on its training-of-trainers methodology, the skills gained can be disseminated at low costs within several developing countries organization. The phase beyond the ToT workshop requires some considerations, as indicated in the next section.
The final stage of experimental cycle, 'application' is often left out by ISNAR when designing the programmes. As a result, the power of experiential learning is significantly diminished or negated altogether. In other to be more effective, ISNAR will need to work closely with the trainees when they return to their own environment, supporting the implementation of the PAPA and the phase beyond the ToT workshop.
The implications or constraints for such action will be mainly personnel time and costs. ISNAR will need to identify subject matter specialists, on the topic the trainee was trained on, and organize visits to the trainee region, for face-to-face interaction. Through those close interaction, it is expected that the trainee will be empowered to make her/his own decisions when applying a new knowledge and the process can be institutionalized and sustainable.
However there are investments in education, the stigma that short term training are exclusively an opportunity to networking, in order words, to bring professional from different places to have 'a good time', is still strong. There is a need to change the attitudes and behaviour of professionals linked to training and capacity strengthening, in order to raise awareness of the importance of developing skills among professionals and change curriculum at university and vocational training level for improving life conditions of poor countries.