Why do consumers chose what they chose and by what they buy? Researchers have identified a number of criteria that are used by people while making their purchase decisions. Among those factors most frequently mentioned are price, brand and store name as well as country of product origin.
The question that the following research attempts to answer is how important the abovementioned external product attributes are to consumers from various socio-economic backgrounds, when they shop at Marks and Spencer (M&S).
The survey is based on 23 questions, designed to be easy to answer as responses should be rapid and spontaneous. The survey asks about peoples perception of intangible phenomena, therefore the semantic differential was predominantly used in order to allow respondents to express intensity of their positive or negative attitudes.
The nature of questions and the quota sampling fit the survey method selected for this study, namely the computer assisted mall-intercept, where the time of questionnaire completion is a crucial factor.
The paper is structured as follows: section 2 contains a brief review of the literature related to the subject of customer's choice determinants; section 3 presents the proposed interviewing strategy followed by a basic cost analysis; while section 4 validates the choice of a sampling method. The developed questionnaire is placed in an appendix at the very end if the document.
The target population is defined as follows (Malhotra, 1999):
The sample size is 200 and was determined by the available budget and the survey method chosen.
To avoid the risk of double questioning respondents, who took part in mall-intercept survey would be asked leave their name and surname and signature while collecting the voucher and would be therefore removed from the sampling frame.
Quota sampling method was selected for this study. According to Malhotra (1999) such nonprobabilistic technique can be used in conjunction with mall intercept interviews. This method is often utilised, when the interest is in the evaluation of the stimuli (e.g. advertisements, and here the importance of external product attributes in purchase decisions), than in projection the results to the entire population. However, under certain circumstances quota sampling obtains results close to conventional probability sampling.
The control categories cover the 5 key target groups of customers shopping at Marks and Spencer, namely:
The target groups (quotas) are delimited on the basis of lifestyle and socio-economic criteria such as age, number of family members and income that are included in the first part of the questionnaire.
In order to reduce the selection bias tight controls will be imposed on interviewers and interviewing procedure and precise guidelines will be suggested for improving the quality of quota samples.