ASDA and Tesco attract nearly 80 per cent of organic food customers, Safeway 13 and Waitrose 9.
Nevertheless, the higher share of monthly expenditure on organic products was noted in the latter supermarket chain, and reached almost 10 percent when the average was just above 8.
Waitrose organic customer tends to be older and better off than the average buyer of organic-labelled food across all of the identified spending categories.
Such person lives in a larger than average household, is open to the media and, unless is the 'Heavy buyer', consumes reduced amounts of meat in favour of fish and vegetables.
The core of Waitrose organic customers are heavy and medium buyers, who dedicate over 6 per cent of their monthly expenditure to organic purchases.
Those two categories together account for nearly 90 per cent of the Waitrose's revenue from organic sales. The marketing campaign should be targeted at them.
Most lighter organic buyers are probably buying organic products 'accidentally' rather than consciously, but represent the area of potential growth in frequency of purchase and the amount spent subject to the targeted marketing camping.
The marketing campaign should emphasise the health, taste and well-being aspects of organic food consumption. It should also stress the environmental and animal welfare aspects of organic food production in order to reinforce the existing customers' positive perception of organic purchases.
The campaign should also strengthen the link between the social image of the three consumer groups and the consumption of organic products, presenting the organic purchases as the 'eco-logical' choice.
The organic market in the UK has grown rapidly in recent years and is now one of the biggest in the word, with annual sales of around
According to the study by Taylor Nelson/Sofres (TNS) Only 7% of organic buyers account for 57% of all the annual spending on organic products. These committed consumers spend c.a. At the other end of the spectrum are almost 30% of organic buyers, who only bought one organic food item in the last 12 months (probably by mistake).
The prospects for organic food in the UK seem to be promising To make to most of this fact, it is crucial for those marketing organic food to better understand who the organic consumers are, what are their preferences and buying behaviour.
The following report is based on research by AC Consulting Ltd. (ACC), commissioned by the supermarket chain, Waitrose. The aim of the research is to define the profile of customers purchasing organic products at Waitrose, on the averaged background of major competitors, and provide practical advice for the design of the tailored marketing strategy.
ACC analysed the profile of 82 organic consumers by means of the SPSS statistical package. Buyers were classified into three groups according to the share of their organic spending overall expenditure
The three key research questions were:
Which aspects of consumer profile are conducive to organic purchases?
How does the profile of Waitrose organic customer differ from the typical organic consumer?
How does the profile of organic consumer differ across the identified spending categories?
The scope of the study did not allow for the extended comparison of all supermarkets across distinguished categories. Therefore, the general, averaged profile of an organic consumer was created Against this background the key distinguishing features of Waitrose customers were identified, so that the unique, precisely targeted marketing strategy could be designed.
The general results show that ASDA and Tesco attract nearly 80 per cent of organic food customers, Safeway 13 and Waitrose only 9 (Figure 3, appendix). Nevertheless, the higher share of monthly expenditure spent on organic products was noted in the latter, and reached almost 10 percent when the average was just above 8. Tables 1-4 (appendix) constitute basis of the following analysis. The identified segments, their share in overall organic Waitrose revenue and the number of consumers, that were used in the research are presented in figures1 and 2 respectively (see appendix).
The findings for the Waitrose chain specifically, according to the distinguished categories, are the following:
The marketing strategy calibrated for Waitrose supermarket chain should be of a hybrid type, taking into account certain common features of organic customers shopping at this chain as well as the characteristics specific for the three distinguished types of spenders.
Although this report does not offer a simple, quick-fix marketing formula for sales and revenue increase, the ACC research shows that the attention has to be paid to a wide range of factors if the successful marketing strategy is to be implemented. The conducted analysis revealed the distinguished profile of the Waitrose organic customer, who tends to be older and better off than the average buyer of organic-labelled food across all of the identified spending categories. Such person lives in a larger than average household, is open to the media and, unless is the heavy buyer, consumes reduced amounts of meat in favour of fish and vegetables. The tailored marketing campaign should therefore be stressing the health, environmental, taste and well-being aspects of organic food consumption. It should also strengthen the link between the social image of the three consumer groups and the consumption of organic products, presenting the organic purchases as the 'eco-logical' choice.
After the non organic consumers were filtered out, there were only 7 consumers left, who purchased organic foodstuffs in Waitrose. This number was too small to conduct reliable statistical inference. In spite of this fact, the analysis was carried out. Most of the data were expressed not in absolute terms, but in percentages, in order to 'masque' the limited number of observations.