The EU's readiness to eliminate export subsidies by 2014, declared at the 6 However, as the details on modalities are yet to be agreed and the only piece of information available is 'the date', the accuracy of conjectures may be limited just like the scope of the following analysis. It focuses solely on the potential impact of export subsidy abolition on the European dairy policy - the last bastion of the old-style CAP. By this example it argues, that the progressing WTO negotiations do and will have a measurable effect on the evolution of the agricultural policy of the European Union.
The essay is organised as follows: section 2 presents shortly the nature of export subsidies as an inherent aspect of the CAP, then section 3 follows with a brief overview of the history of the WTO negotiations that have step-by-step led to the current explicit declarations of export refund abolition. Section 4 focuses on the nature of the European dairy policy, while section 5 contains the summary of the opinions on the expected changes this policy will undergo, if the agreement on export refunds happens to be binding.
Export subsidies, by definition, are the restitutions granted to exporters and they amount to the difference between the average world price and the higher domestic price of a given product in a given country.
Export subsidies are the integral part of the farm support system of the European Union and became a crucial instrument when the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) proved to be more than successful in achieving its objective of food supply security. They allowed for excess supply to be disposed of on the world market,
The application of this particular instrument is often criticised for its contribution to the 'disarray in world agriculture'.
The first attempts at export subsidy elimination from the post-War II world trade system date back to the very initial stage of GATT negotiations in the late 1940s. Article XVI of the Agreement suggested that the country granting any form of subsidy should notify its 'Contracting Parties in writing of the extent and nature of the subsidization, of the estimated effect of the subsidization (...) and of the circumstances making the subsidization necessary'. However, the issue was identified and the scene was set for export subsidy application to be challenged in the future.
Further, in 1955, Article XVI was extended to include a notation prohibiting the use of export subsidies on all but primary products. It is now claimed, that that was the moment when the special treatment of agriculture in the GATT framework was sealed
The first successful attempt at curbing the use of export refunds in this particular sector was the Punta del Este Declaration of 1986, officially starting the Uruguay Round. It contained the direct statement of will to improve 'the competitive environment by increasing discipline on the use of all (...) subsidies (...) affecting directly or indirectly agricultural trade." However, it was not until 8 years later, in April 1994 in Marrakesh, that the binding decisions were taken.  This export subsidy constraints, even if of a limited initial impact,
As far as the European Union is concerned, there can be little doubt that such concessions were only possible due to the introduction of the CAP reforms of 1992. Even if it could be bitterly argued that 'the movement away from explicit export subsidies to compensatory payments (...) may imply little more than a shallow and convenient change of appearance',
The URAA prescribed that renewed agricultural negotiations were to begin in 2000. A year before, Franz Fischler, the EU Farm Commissioner at that time, claimed that 'the Agenda 2000 reforms will form the core of our negotiating position [on the WTO arena]'. The future showed that more reforms were needed to cope with the demands within the WTO framework and they came as early as 2003-2004.
In November 2001 the fourth WTO Ministerial Conference held in Doha, Qatar eventually resulted in a Declaration with a clear timetable - however disobeyed- and a statement of objectives.
This statement was endorsed on 1 August 2004 by the General Council's post Cancun decision, the so-called 'July package', containing During the latter Ministerial meeting the consensus on 'parallel elimination of all forms of export subsidies (...) by the end of 2013' was eventually declared.
Subscription to this agreement may seem to be a rather bold step of the EU, that in the year 1998 granted over 90% of world export subsidies.
In the past, most of the financial support to the dairy sector has been channelled through the butter and skim milk processors. This was supplemented by the quota system introduced in 1984 to reduce oversupply in order to maintain farmgate milk prices.
The system remained unaffected by the Mac Sharry CAP reforms of 1992. It also survived the seemingly far reaching declarations of export subsidy cuts under the URRA, mainly due to the choice of the reference period. The reductions of refunds curbed the subsidised cheese exports, but paradoxically encouraged the exports of butter and skim milk powder (SMP). It was because the levels of exports of these commodities were simply lower in the first year of Agreement implementation than in the base period.
Nevertheless, with the perspective of re-opening of the trade talks on the WTO arena in the year 2000 the EU's dairy policy was to undergo considerable changes being a subject to two consecutive reforms.
The intention of Agenda 2000 reform package was to cut the support price for processors by 15% over 3 years starting from 2005 and convert it into a headage payment granted directly to farmers as a form of partial compensation for price reductions.
The striking aspect of this reform was a significant implementation delay, but the strongest critique in the context of export subsidies centred around its weak provisions, namely that the price cuts were too small to allow exports without refunds. It was considered that a cut of at least 20% was necessary to allow a significant increase in unsubsidised exports of the EU's milk surplus.
Therefore the subsequent Fischler CAP reform of 2003, that intended to deepen the abovementioned processes, brought the cuts one year forward compared to Agenda 2000 plan and differentiated for butter (25%) and skimmed milk powder (15%), totalling 22% by 2007. The dairy direct payments were to be incorporated into the decoupled Single Farm Payment (SFP) Scheme once the reform was fully implemented (i.e. in 2007 at the latest).
Ironically, the provisions of the last reform have not yet been implemented, but voices already can be heard The nagging questions that remain to be answered are how and when the policy will be changed.
In 2005, the European Union, as the second largest exporter of butter and skimmed milk powder, was selling to the third countries 211,263 and 192,753 tonnes of these products respectively. At the same time the EU spent c.a. 1 billion EUR on export refunds to make that sales possible. The SMP was a more modest contributor to that figure. The 10% gap between the EU and world price for SMP can be considered relatively small and will be further reduced on July 1 2006 together with the final 5% price cut as a result of the Fishler reform. In terms of butter, the situation is not as buoyant, because export subsidy exceeds the world market price by 50% and the gap will remain significant even after the foreseen cuts.
The question that now should be asked, is how binding the current EU commitments for the export subsidy elimination by 2013 are; and in addition, how important is the deal that a 'substantial' part will have to be eliminated in the first half of the implementation period (i.e. by 2010).
If - most naturally- the starting point for the phase-out of export subsidies would be the ceilings currently applicable under the 1994 Uruguay Round agreement, the EU would enjoy quite significant room for manoeuvre. As shown in table 1. in 2006 the EU has foreseen 841m EUR for total dairy sector export refunds compared with a WTO-authorised maximum totalling 2,263 billion EUR.
This would mean that even a 60% reduction in the budget ceiling could pass unnoticed (assuming world prices and the euro-dollar exchange rate remain relatively stable). But a 60% reduction in the volume ceiling (i.e. from 399 300 to 159 720 tonnes annually) would have an immediate impact, as it would equal to a quarter of EU's last year's exports.
If the European Union does not manage to impose the export subsidy phase-out based solely on budgetary commitments, European policymakers will have a hard nut to crack. The two most obvious alternative directions that the CAP reformers could take to eliminate excess supply would be to consider:
However, the possible future need for the reduction of import tariffs would render the latter solution not feasible. Having that in mind it could be argued that the first option - as more realistic- could be accompanied by quota elimination. This would let farmers - then exposed to market forces- compensate for price reductions by increased volume of production. This could be preceded by allowing for cross-border milk quota trading within the EU
It still has to be seen how efficient the SFP Scheme will be in assisting dairy farmers through the difficult process of changes. Theoretically, thanks to the new support system they will have a secure source of income separate from market returns; and it will also give them the option of withdrawing from dairying if the market prospects were poor.
Under this more market-orientated system, the Commission might decide to abandon intervention for the lower-value dairy commodities, especially that it's officials have for years emphasized and still claim
The alternative options for the EU dairy policy are now numerous, one thing however can be relatively certain - the general review of the EU budget in 2008-09 may not be the first opportunity taken. According to EU Agriculture Commissioner Mariann Fischer Boel's chief advisor, Poul Skytte Christopherssen 'the Commission would resist any calls for the 'big bang' change to the cap in 2009, because the big bang of [CAP reform in] 2003 is still working its way through our farm sector'.
Attempts at the elimination of export subsidies for primary products from the agricultural polices have a long history. Paradoxically, the presence of this instrument in the world trade system was legitimized at the very early stage of GATT negotiations. At that time, the rules of international exchange in agricultural goods were developed to fit the highly protectionist domestic rural policies and not It was not until the Uruguay Round, when the era of the international regulation of food and farm policies
The spectacular agreement coined in Hong Kong in December 2005 puts an end to that struggles. Supposedly, it also spells the end of one of the most trade-distorting policies in the world. With the deal on 'modalities' still awaited it is difficult to precisely prejudge the effect of negotiations. Nevertheless, as it can be seen by the simple example of the European dairy policy, even the sheer subsidy elimination would have a domino effect on all the other instruments of the old-style CAP it is logically linked with. It would help to finally erase the shameful and troublesome 'mountains' and 'lakes' from the landscape of the European dairy sector. Having that in mind, it is difficult to underestimate the contribution of the effects of the WTO talks to the policy change in Europe.