The society of fifth century Athens could be described as one of the few slave societies that have existed in the world. It was a society in which the use of slaves was an everyday occurrence and it can be said that the economy and stability of the society relied on the use of slaves. Slaves in Athens, like women in Athens, were not classed as citizens and it can be asserted that they were not treated as human beings. There are many aspects of slavery that shed light on how slaves were treated. These are the amount of slaves in Athens, how the slavery was justified, whether the Athenians were cruel to their slaves, whether the slaves were considered to be less human than the free people of Athens and whether the comic characterisations of the treatment of slaves in the plays of Aristophanes are at all true.
As fifth century Athens was a slave society we can safely say that there was a large number of slaves in Athens. There were in fact such a large number of slaves that it can be said that the Greeks could not imagine life without any slaves. There were different kinds of slaves in Athens, and therefore different slaves would have had different experiences with different masters and types of work. The public slaves and the skilled craftsmen may have experienced a more pleasant life compared to that of the miners who were often worked to death in appalling conditions, and the domestics slaves may have been able to forge relationships with their masters while agricultural slaves faced had work on the fields.
Overall slavery as was never really questioned in the classical period as many Greeks could see no alternatives to slaves, there was therefore often no need for it to be justified. He commented on how people were born, stating that some people were born to "rule or be ruled", and therefore slavery was just and an advantage for the slave.
Athenians were in some ways cruel to their slaves. Slave owners could punish their slaves without fear of the law, this would have sometimes included harsh treatment. However, not all slave owners would have been interested in looking after their slaves. In the speech Lysias 4, a man "proposed that his own slaves should be interrogated under torture", this is showing a disregard for the condition of the slave as tortured slaves could be returned to their owners less able than before.
In terms of the law, the rights of slaves were protected in some ways. Slaves are protected from being murdered. In Antiphon 5, a slave is murdered because he is accused of killing his master and his murders are told "a jury's vote applies just as much to the man who kills a slave as to the man who kills a free man". In Demosthenes 21, it states "if anyone humiliates anyone, whether they are free or slave, or commits any illegal act against any of these, let any Athenian who has the right to do so and wishes submit their names to the Thesmothetai". It is therefore debatable whether these laws were actually effective in the protection of slaves. Other laws such as that stating "persons other than the slaves owner is not allowed to strike him" do not completely protect slaves, first the owner can still beat the slave and it will only protect the slave if the owner takes action when others beat the slave.
It could be argued that the slaves in Athens could not have been treated too badly because of the lack of revolts against the slave owners, even though slavery was so common. However there is a logical explanation for this. Most of the slaves in Athens were 'barbarians' after it became illegal for Athenians to be enslaved in Athens after solon's reforms.
In some ways slaves in fifth century Athens were considered less human than the free people. As Aristotle states " the polarity between 'slave' and 'free' seemed as natural a way of dividing up the human race as those between men and women or young and old". There were many ways in which slaves were dehumanised. They are referred to as 'property' and compared to 'wild beasts', suggesting that they are a lower life form than the free men.
Slaves are often presented in comedy, particularly by play writers such as Aristophanes who uses frequent comic characterisations of slaves. The slaves in the many plays set in fifth century Athens can hardly be said to give accurate descriptions of how slaves were treated at the time due to the fact that it is a comedy, designed to make an audience of the time laugh rather than a documentary. This shows us that torture was probably not commonly used.
Overall I believe that slaves were not treated as humans. Although there were limited laws in place to protect the rights of slave, these were only useful if the slaves master or another citizen was willing to file a lawsuit, and slaves were often not deemed important enough to go to the trouble. The power the masters had over the slaves and the various methods of dehumanisation further took away the character and the personality of a slave so that they were barely human. Although some slaves may have been treated well by their masters, the masters had two much power over their slaves, and society too many restrictions to allow slaves to live as proper humans.