During the last decades, agricultural research and extension services have been delivered at a national scale, in the form of top-down transfer of technology systems. The green revolution technology promoted by them has been successful at achieving macroeconomic growth in the agricultural sector and at improving the efficiency and quality of commercial farming, but it has not helped the poorest farmers (Chambers et al, 1989).
While having various strengths, such as a nationwide coverage; the encouragement of close and periodical links to research; an ordered structure that simplifies supervision, monitoring and evaluation and offers career opportunities for field staff; some level of participation of farmers in the planning sessions; regular training of the extension agents; and an unified extension system where farmers have to deal with only one agent, the national extension services, based on the T&amp;V concept, have also many important weaknesses fundamentally of methodological nature (even without considering external limiting factors, such as the policy environment, and the financial aspects). Resource-poor farmers have not been reached by the service, due to agents relying on "contact farmers" who comprise only 10% of the total farmers and are commonly better off. Thus, the rate of transfer of the delivered messages to the remotest, poorest non-contact farmers is low. Moreover, the system is focused on general messages and standardised techniques designed to maximise impact in the short term, which are not adapted to the local environmental, social and/or economical conditions and which do not take into account the risks that poor farmers face when adopting innovations. The large scale of the operations further increases the difficulties of delivering technologies that are appropriate for each location. Additionally, as participation of the clients is very limited, comprising only the installation of on-farm test plots by contact farmers, indigenous technical knowledge is hardly recognised and used (Albert et al, 1999, Anderson and Feder, 2004; Hangmann et al, 1998a).
As a general consequence, the lack of participation of the farmers, as well as inadequate ways to measure the effectiveness of extension (using general, quantitative indicators not directly related to its quality), has lead to a weak accountability towards the clients and their real needs and thus to much less real impact than expected (Anderson and Feder, 2004).
With the development of commercial agriculture, private extension services have been established in many countries, offering advice to farmers rich enough to pay for it. But subsistence farmers, living in remote, complex, diverse and mainly rain-fed areas, still need publicly funded help in order to improve their livelihoods. Paradoxically, these farmers are the ones that have been systematically neglected by conventional extension (Chambers et al, 1989). This is why many institutions have started to change the extension approaches, trying out more participatory methodologies that aim to grasp poor farmers' real demands and needs, and reducing the scale of the delivery agencies.
However, there is still a large range of different understandings of participation, both in its purpose and its practical application. Basically, three main levels of participation can be distinguished (Scherler et al, 1998):
Despite many organisations still work at the first level of participation, in which farmers still do not have a say in the problem definition and the search for solutions, it is the second and rather the third level that need to be achieved. In order to do this, our understanding of extension needs to change: The new approaches are based on the concept of facilitation, whereas "rather than extension providing answers to farmers, the aim (...) is to enable farmers to define their own problems and develop their own solutions" (Albert et al, 1999, p. 6).
Cross-sectoral interventions are needed, where agricultural technology development is integrated with institutional and capacity building. This goal requires multidisciplinary approaches that address technical and social issues at the same time. Empowerment and community participation must be the basis of the solutions, so that the process focuses on raising farmers' critical capacities and on sharing knowledge with them. Thus, farmers are provided with a basket of technical options and the criteria for identifying their problems and choosing or developing the most suitable solutions, combining foreign knowledge with their own and adapting them to their local conditions. Additionally, assistance must be offered for developing rural institutional frameworks that ensure sustainability and encourage the dissemination of the successful innovations (Csaki, 2001; Hangmann et al, 1998a).
The extension agents' role is to assist in this process, acting as facilitators and mediators. Researchers provide access to external knowledge and technical options, help in the experimentation encouraging the farmers to take control of it and learn from it, and provide them with tools for analysing and systematising their findings (Hangmann et al, 1998b; Gndel, 1998).
There's evidence that decentralised participatory research and extension experiences show higher levels of adoption of agricultural and natural resource management technologies (Dalton et al, 2005; Axinn, 1997; Garforth and Harford, 1997), because the technologies developed are relevant and appropriate toward the real needs of the population. But participatory approaches have other positive outcomes that reach beyond the mere spreading of agricultural technologies (Ashby, 1987; Braun et al, 2000; Scoones and Thompson, 1994; Okali et al, 1994; Dalton et al, 2005; Garforth and Harford, 1997; Hangmann, 1998b):
The relationship between farmers, development professionals and scientists is improved: local traditional knowledge and capacities gain in legitimacy in the eyes of professionals; farmers' capacity to raise demands on the formal systems is increased, and thus the feedback to scientists for the development of useful technologies is accelerated.
The intervention is more legitimate: the project team is accountable not only to the intervening organisation or the donors, but directly towards farmers aswell. Therefore farmers more easily accept the intervention outcomes as theirs, so that local support and direct involvement of the beneficiaries increase the sustainability of the project.
People are "empowered": their knowledge, innovative capacity and confidence are improved, helping them to respond to problems and/or opportunities in different situations.
There is more equity in the access to means of production by different groups or individuals in the community, because participation implies the negotiation of interests among these groups and provides space for the poor and marginalised in collective decision-making.
Poverty is reduced because most of the promoted technologies are labour-intensive, providing employment for the landless and near-landless.
Food security and children nutrition are enhanced due to increased production security.
Natural resources and the environment are managed in a more sustainable way.
There are some aspects, fundamental for the definitive success of participatory research and extension, which most experiences presented by the literature still do not describe clearly. Thus, the following questions may be raised:
How are participatory extension and research projects managed?
What are the costs involved in their implementation?
What are the needs in terms of institutional framework, human and technical resources and structural conditions in order to achieve success?
What kind of success indicators can be used for their monitoring and evaluation?
Are their outcomes sustainable once the intervening agency has left?
Is it possible to scale them up beyond the community level?
What kind of training do extension agents need in order to respond to the new challenges posed by participatory approaches? How can their hierarchical, teaching, paternalistic and often self-important attitude be changed into one that is more facilitating, inviting, promoting, encouraging and supportive?
Additionally, the following risks should be taken into account and prevented:
The questions, risks and threats mentioned above clearly show that implementing participatory extension and research means much more than training the staff in new methods and techniques and releasing them to the field. As stated by Scherler et al (1998, p. 12): "If extension workers are supposed to change attitudes and behaviour, the organisation has to adjust its structure, the roles and responsibilities of staff at different levels, as well as its overall strategy. But there is also a need for new forms of outside cooperation with other organisations and third parties involved".
As a conclusion to this briefing paper, it shall be remarked that the goal of this initiative is to build a local, decentralised, non-bureaucratic, effective, efficient and demand-driven agricultural technology development and extension service in order to achieve a real improvement in the quality of life of the poorest farmers. It should aim at encouraging sustainable agricultural systems, preserving and making use of the local traditional agricultural knowledge, promoting more equity in the distribution of knowledge and generating self helping initiatives by the farmers. Hard work lies ahead in order to achieve these outcomes, but with everybody's collaboration and with appropriate coordination with other sectors or institutions within the agricultural sector this will become the new reality in our district.