The sample data concerns the marks of 408 students obtained in first year statistics exam ( A summary of descriptive statistic in Appendix 1 shows that the average marks obtained was 64.9%. The median was also 65% while the minimum and maximum were 9% and 95% respectively. A standard deviation of 13.06 implies that majority of the results vary between 51.8% and 77.9%. The correlation matrix in Appendix 1 shows that some notable variables with positive effect on exam results include ability, attendance and time spent on revision while variables like expenditure on alcohol and coming from the UK are found to have a negative impact on
Amongst all the variables, ability was found to be the most significant variable affecting qtmark as demonstrated by its high correlation of 0.37. The fact that the ability of all students is normally distributed suggests a fair and adequate sample for regression. According to Romer This concurs with the strong positive correlation of 0.28 and 0.24 between Most of the students attended an approximate mean of 80% for both lectures and classes. There is a slight disparity in the data set because there is a weak negative correlation of 0.006 between the proportion of revision lectures attended ( This could be attributed to the low mean proportion of revision lectures attended, 47%. Nevertheless, when For students who have been consistently working hard, as evident from the number of A-grades obtained at A-level (
Some of the data do not appear to be very convincing because of the small sample size. There are only 126 observations as to whether a student has a home computer and this is only available for the year 2004.It would have been more useful to find out in addition to owning a computer, the number of hours spent on using the computer for statistics. There does not seem to be a simple explanation for the outliers in the scatter plots in Appendix 1 for the regression of However, their impact on the regression is not significant.
First, restrict the sample to those having Table 2.1 in Appendix 2 shows that there is a positive relationship between ( If attr were zero, qtmark would be about 64.73999%.In addition, 0.0049% of the variation in qtmark is explained by attr because the R In a bivariate model, the R In this case we can see that this regression is not the best fit.
Next, test the null hypothesis that there is no relationship between Holding all other variables constant, the estimated value of coefficient Under the null hypothesis, we observe that the In other words, accept the null hypothesis that Under the same null hypothesis that the true slope coefficient is zero, the If we square the This shows the close relationship between the This can only be true when the degree of freedom for the Hence we can see that at the 5% level, we do not reject the null hypothesis.
In (2b), the variables However, the sample is still restricted to students having both This multi-variate model is assumed to be linear in parameters. The coefficients of Table 2.2 in Appendix 2 shows that there is still a positive linear relationship between However, the intercept has changed; if The R As R In this three-variable model, the multiple coefficient of determination R This is an extension of the two-variable model in (2a). The multiple correlation R is simply the measure of the degree of association between qtmark and all the explanatory variables jointly.
Where
F statistic=
Therefore at the 5% significant level, do not reject
Referring to the line graph in appendix 2, conclude that there is nonlinearity in the effect of
Restricted model:
Unrestricted model:
The results from the three regression (in Appendix 4) showed that in except in 2004, the number of A-grades obtained at A-level had the largest effect( compared to other variables like ability and proportion of class attended) on the marks obtained in first year statistics exam. The coefficient on ability was the largest in year 2002, implying that an increase in ability had the greatest effect on marks for the 2002 respondents. On the other hand, an increase in class attendance had the greatest impact on marks for the 2003 respondents.
Restricted model
Unrestricted model: year 2002:
Year 2003:
Year 2004:
F statistic=
Therefore at the 5% significance level, do not reject
The attributes of a good model The Occam's razor or the principle of parsimony states that a model be kept as simple as possible. (ii) Identifiabilty- for a given set of data, the estimated parameters must have unique values. (iii) Goodness of fit- Since the basic thrust of regression analysis is to explain as much of the variation in the dependent variable as possible by explanatory variables included in the model, a model is judged good if this explanation, as measured by the adjusted Ris as high as possible.(iv)Theoretical consistency- No matter how high the goodness of fit measures, a model may not be judged good if one or more coefficients have the wrong signs. In constructing a model, we need to have some theoretical underpinning to it. (v) Predictive power- Milton Friedman, the Nobel laureate notes: "the only relevant test of the validity of a hypothesis model is comparison of its prediction with experience". Taking into account the above five attributes of a good model, my statistically preferred model for
where