It has been argued that an open trade regime is very important for the economic development of small developing countries as these countries face constraints in the size of their domestic market and in the abundance of their resources. In the following the propositions regarding the effects of opening a small developing country to free trade are analysed and discussed.
Characteristically, small countries face a perfectly elastic supply of imports and a perfectly elastic demand for exports which means they are unable to influence the price of imports and exports (Ayhan Kose, 2002). Further, they trade on world capital markets at an exogenously given rate of interest and their R&D activities do not influence the rate of accumulation of knowledge capital in the world at large (Grossman and Helpman, 1991).
Small developing countries in particular tend to rely heavily on a narrow range of primary commodities for their export earnings. These earnings tend to be highly unstable because of recurrent and sharp fluctuations in the relative prices of primary commodities, hence these countries are highly vulnerable to external shocks. Further, small developing countries tend to depend heavily on imported capital goods and intermediate inputs for domestic production. Often, a significant part of their export revenues is used to pay back their large foreign debt (Ayhan Kose, 2002). Finally, small developing countries dispose of very few resources and often the size of their markets is not sufficient for companies to produce at an efficient rate.
Bigstenal. (2004) concluded in case of African manufactures that as domestic markets are very small, if African countries are to industrialise, it will have to be through exports.
The view that an open trade regime is beneficial to the economic development of small developing countries has been based partly on neoclassical trade theory, which generally finds that countries with persistent high levels of protection appear to suffer significantly. Partly it is based on several empirical paper such as Sachs and Warner (1995) which find that trade liberalisation is beneficial to growth (Rutherford and Tarr, 1998). According to theory, by opening up its economy a small developing country should be able to raise aggregate welfare as depicted in Graph 1.
Autarky and free trade equilibria for a small developing country are compared: under autarky production the country realizes a level of aggregate utility which corresponds to the indifference curve Iaut and the production and consumption point is A. In free trade the production and consumption points are B and C, respectively. The country realizes a level of aggregate utility which corresponds to the indifference curve Itrade. Since the free trade indifference curve Itrade lies to the north east of the autarky indifference curve Iaut, national welfare rises as the small developing country moves to free trade (Krugman, 1999).
Domestic markets of small developing countries are too small for optimal scale in production to be achieved (Srinivasan and Chenery,1989, and Bigsten et al., 2004). Additionally, markets in developing countries apart from being small tend to be protected. This may lead either to a small number of firms in the market and a lack of competition. Consequently, resources are drawn into the domestic low-quality high-cost production with costs that are even higher as they would be as a result of the comparative disadvantage because producers take advantage of their monopolistic position. Or, it may be the case, that the number of firms is relatively large resulting in small-scale and inefficient production levels (Krueger, A.O., 1998).
However, by opening up it economy the low-cost producers can expand their level of production through exporting and they achieve economies of scale and economies of specialisation. Resources from the relatively inefficient non-trade sector may reallocate to the higher productive export sector (Giles and Williams, 2000). Further, free trade may generate new activities in line with the business opportunities existing in the world market (Cuadros et al., 2004).
Dynamic gains from trade are to arise from domestic industries producing more efficiently as they face foreign import competition (Bigsten et al., 2004). The firms have to improve their production processes as well as the quality of their products in order to remain competitive (Cuadros et al., 2004).
Barring effects of increased competition, positive externalities and permanent effects of trade liberalisation on productivity are also to arise through learning effects in both the export and the non-export producing sector of the economy (Srinivasan and Chenery,1989). When examining the manufacturing sector in Africa, Bigstenal. (2004) found learning-by exporting to be possible, and they suggest that large gains may arise for Africa from orientating its manufacturing sector towards exporting. By opening up its economy a small developing country has better access to advanced technologies (Giles and Williams, 2000) and to investments of multinational enterprises which seem to be the principal vehicle for the international transfer of technology (Cuadros et al., 2004). The subsequent higher rates of technological innovation as well as the gains accruing from learning by doing and the resulting improvement in production techniques is thought to increase long-run growth (Cuadros et al., 2004). Domestic enterprises also have the opportunity to learn from foreign enterprises about good management practices which may result in efficiency gains (Giles and Williams, 2000). However, there is little evidence that companies improve their efficiency as
a result of learning-by-exporting, it may rather be the case that efficient companies self-select into the export market (Bigsten et al., 2004).
In the process of opening the economy to trade, trade flows as well as capital flows are expected to increase. The revenues from exporting are likely to alleviate foreign exchange constraints and can thereby provide greater access to international markets (Cuadros et al., 2004 and Srinivasan and Chenery,1989) by facilitating the import of inputs in order to meet domestic demand, which in turn enables output expansion. The raise in import of more capital intensive goods including investment and intermediate goods may be conducive to economic growth. Resources that were deployed in the domestic relatively high-cost-production of capital intensive goods, are released and can be reallocated in the labour-intensive sector where the comparative advantage of the developing country lies. Hence, national income saved increases as capital intensive goods are less expensive and level of real investment rises as the prices of capital goods are lower (Krueger, 1998). Furthermore, revenues can be used for development as well as assistance with debt servicing (Giles and Williams, 2000).
Apart from giving better access to foreign capital, the integration with world financial markets may have benefits in that they force government to follow policies that create and maintain macroeconomic stability. Reason being that with the increased financial openness it is easier for investors to punish countries in response to perceptions that their macroeconomic policies are creating instabilities (Montiel and Servn, 2004). A stable macroeconomic policy features a fiscal stance consistent with fiscal solvency; a robust exchange-rate regime that avoids both systematic currency misalignment as well as excessive real exchange-rate volatility; and a monetary policy stance consistent with a low and stable rate of inflation (Krugman, 1999). All of the above measures help to create and maintain a predictable domestic macroeconomic environment which is important in the promotion of resource-allocation decisions, investment and growth (Montiel and Servn, 2004). And it seems to be that case that the effects of openness on economic performance are contingent on macroeconomic stability and on the existence of efficient institutions (Cuadros et al., 2004).
Whether opening up the economy to trade actually leads to growth in a small developing country depends on a variety of factors. Most importantly the process has to be accompanied by macroeconomic policies aiming at long-term stability. This would impart trust to foreign investors who then may convey technology and capital into the country so that learning and efficiency gains take place. Furthermore, the country has to dispose of reasonably well-functioning factor markets and basic capacities in the first place, in order to be able to take advantage of the positive effects that accrue from free trade and capital flows.
Hence, the conclusion is that opening up the economy creates opportunities for a small developing to improve its economic situation and to generate growth, however, its success is conditional on certain circumstances that have to be created before or in the course of the opening process.