Agricultural policy in Poland has been diverse over the past 20 years, it has varied from negative protection in 1990/91 i.e. food consumers were subsidized by agricultural producers to relatively high levels of support in the late 1990s (World Bank, 2000). In the last few years, with the approaching of the EU accession which eventually took place in 2004, market price support has been decreased and a general shift to other support measures took place.
In the following the extent and impact of the different policy measures used by the Polish government in the pursuit of its objectives are analysed and discussed. The achievements of the policies are examined as well as their side-effects and based on these findings, policy recommendations are made.
Agricultural area in Poland amounts to 18.2 million hectares representing 58.3% of the total area (European Commission, 2002). Four fifths of agricultural land was not put into collective farms and basically all land is farmed privately. The average farm size in 1998 was 7.9 ha (Sharman, 2003). However, the farm structure differs significantly on a regional basis: A small number of formerly state-owned but now increasingly privately owned large commercial farms is situated in the northern and western part of the country (IAMO,2004). Whereas in the rest of the country a large number of very small farms, usually run with labour from one family and producing for subsistence prevail. The fragmented pattern of ownership is a constraint to investment in efficiency improvements (Ministry of Agriculture, 2005) and farms are largely over-equipped with machinery and buildings that are largely depreciated and out-of-date (Petrick, 2004). Hence, capital endowment of farms is low and it is substituted by land and labour. This demonstrates that a low degree of specialisation is the main reasons for low agricultural productivity and low farm income levels in Poland (IAMO, 2004).
Accordingly, the economic importance of the agricultural sector in terms of GDP is small with a GDP of 2.9% in 2002 (EU-27 average 2%). However, the agricultural sector plays an important role in employment. In 2000, 18.8% of the population were employed in this sector (Latruffe et al., 2005). Small family farms have served in the past as a buffer for the unemployed and compensated for the uncertain and inadequate safety net provided by state pensions which lead to overpopulation and hidden unemployment in the countryside (Sharman, 2003).
Farmers in Poland have been very effective in pushing their interests, both at the ballot box and in the street (Sharman, 2003). Generally, aid has been much more forthcoming for private farmers, as opposed to state farms and upstream and downstream firms, as every farmer owning more than 0.3 hectares qualifies for state support (Sharman, 2003).
However, generally agricultural support in Poland is relatively low, in 2003 the % PSE came to 9% while the OECD average was 31% for the period of 2001 to 2003. The total costs for agriculture made up 1% of GDP in 2001-03, which is approximately half the level of 1991-93. The cost imposed on consumers (CSE) averaged 9% in 2001-03 (OECD, 2004).
The government intervenes in several ways to overcome uncertainty in production and instability in prices farm incomes and eventually to support farm incomes (Legg, 2003). Further, the government attempts to promote structural change in that farmers increase their productivity by using current production factors more intensively, i.e. increasing yields, by using more land and/or capital, by specialising their enterprises and thus becoming more efficient and by reducing the agricultural labour force (Lindemans and Swinnen, 1997). Another reason for government intervention is that Polish agricultural production has to comply with EU regulations ranging from labelling and product information to quarantine, veterinary and phytosanitary regulations (Sharman, 2003).
The Polish government uses a variety of instruments to promote structural change of the farming sector. It has been relatively successful with the installation of the advisory services, and other measures such as the farm credit programme are potentially successful if inefficiencies can be overcome. However, some measures including market price support and domestic support do not raise farm incomes in the long-run and the raise issues regarding intergenerational and social equity. It may be that at least part of the solution for the Polish government to ensure "reasonable" income levels for farm households lies outside of agricultural policy entirely. Temporary income support, training and skills upgrading, reemployment assistance, etc. could prove to be more efficient and cost effective than the current policy set (Dewbre and Short, 2002).