This essay is concerned with a description and evaluation of the agricultural development strategy of Mauritius in the period between 1970 and 2000 is. A brief introduction to the island, is followed by the paradigms that were underlying agricultural policies in Africa at the time. Finally the different policies and their outcomes are evaluated.
The small island state of Mauritius is located in the south west region of the Indian Ocean.
Mauritius' total area is around 2,040 km Its climate is tropical, with attendant disease burdens and problems with tropical agriculture. Mauritius was visited by cyclones in 1970, late-1975, and early-1980; by drought in 1983; and by a cyclone in 1984 all of which severely damaged crops (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990).
In 1968, Mauritius proclaimed independence. At this point in time the country was poor with a per capita income of about US$260 (Worldbank, 2005). Moreover, the pattern of asset and income distribution was very skewed. The thirty large sugar plantations were owned by Franco-Mauritians and accounted for nearly half of the total cultivable area (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). Since the 1960's Mauritius witnessed rapid growth in population as depicted in Table 1.
Being a small island, Mauritius is subject to a range of problems that are associated with small economies. Economic activity is less diversified and a small domestic resource base limits the capacity for transformation. The small economy suffers from diseconomies of scale and its small domestic market limits the opportunities for economic development (Chernoff and Warner, 2002).
Sugar is the dominant commodity in Mauritius both for the agricultural sector and the economy overall (Beintema, et al., 2003). Mauritius's share in the EEC quota is 38 percent, under the Lom The price guaranteed by the EEC to ACP countries is equal to the producer price for European beet sugar producers, which means that it is more stable and usually higher than world prices (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990). Mauritius' high dependence on one export commodity, leads to vulnerability to external shocks and natural hazards (Chernoff and Warner, 2002).
In this section the respective development paradigms prevailing in Africa at the time are being described.
Since the 1970s the basic human needs paradigm prevailed. It gave priority to the allocation of programmatic and public investment resources. In particular increased self-sufficiency was to be achieved by promoting national food production. The paradigm was part of "the growth-with-equity era since 1970" that was linked with the commodity boom and heightened rural inequality. It argued that improving the welfare, education, technical knowledge, and active participation of all people will increase both productive capacity and actual production more than growth strategies that rely on trickle-down for transmission of benefits. Subsidies for basic foods and redistributive policies were the chosen instruments (Gulhati and Nallari, 1990)
As from 1979 the Mauritian economy was marked by recession inflation, sharply increased unemployment. A Structural adjustment (SA) program was formulated in conjunction with and supported by the World Bank and IMF (Bowman, 1991). The paradigm underlying SA programs saw emerging agricultural and overall development problems as the result of artificially distorted price incentives, that asked for measures to promote macroeconomic balance through aggregate demand management (Delgado, 1995). However, in case of Mauritius the SA programme primarily encompassed institutional improvements in the export sector (Bundoo and Dabee, 1999).
The paradigm that emerged in the 1980s can be loosely termed "supply-shifters," in reference to an earlier terminology concerning those non-price factors that shift agricultural production functions upward, leading to more output for the same inputs. Public investment in research, extension, and infrastructure were boosted in order to provide more support to agricultural production, while R&D started to focus on the food side of the agricultural sector (Delgado, 1995).
Finally, in the 1990s the sustainable development (SD) paradigm emerged. Great emphasis was placed on the widespread degradation of the agricultural resource base in Africa and the relationship of such degradation to externalities. SD is concerned with rapid population growth, agricultural income stagnation, and environmental degradation of rural areas (Delgado, 1995).
This section covers the policies pursued by the Mauritian government in the period concerned.
This section reviews the outcomes of the agricultural policies.
Mauritius has, to some extent, been successful in boosting its sugar industry, while at the same time extracting resources from it for further economic development. However, the sector is now facing constraints to further growth and, in view of the phasing out of preferential arrangements with developed countries, it requires further diversification within the sector and away from agriculture in general to find new sources of growth. Moreover, the skewed pattern of ownership of land constitutes a major constraint to agricultural and economic diversification, and to a more equitable distribution of income among the rural population.