The biographies of eminent Greeks and Romans written by Plutarch were not texts designed simply to record the subject's life, but rather used their protagonist as a model for imparting moral lessons to the reader. Plutarch hoped that by showing virtuous characters, his readers would be able to emulate the subject's good qualities and thus better themselves. In this commentary I will look at the end of the Life and how it summarises different themes recurrent in the text, such as demonstrating Pericles' virtues, Plutarch's defence of Pericles against the charge of being a demagogue, and the author's techniques in doing this.
Before looking at the virtues shown in this section of the Life, it is worth pointing out that the Because Plutarch paired these two figures together his biographies of them often share similar features, which I will acknowledge in parts of this commentary.
One of the virtues that Plutarch admired in Pericles was his calmness. Instances of this calmness can be seen throughout the Life, for example when the Spartans invaded Attica and the Athenians were desperate to go to war, Pericles remained composed and followed his own plan of action. Contemporary comic poets had given this title to Pericles as a way of making fun of his aloof manner.
Another trait of both Pericles and Fabius that is seen as a virtue by Plutarch is their lack of superstition. Throughout the Life Pericles is untroubled by bad omens, for example in chapter 35 he ignores an eclipse that terrifies everyone else who sees it. In the extract I am discussing Plutarch indirectly mentions this lack of superstition by mentioning how, when Pericles was ill, his character deteriorated to such an extent that he had taken to wearing an amulet, which showed "what a terrible state he must be in to submit to such nonsense". Stadter has pointed out that several other biographies by Plutarch show a change in the protagonist's character near the end of the Life, for example Alexander also became increasingly superstitious.
In chapter 39 Plutarch gives something similar to an encomium when he summarises Pericles' career in an entirely positive tone. Yet the one aspect of Pericles' life that caused most dispute amongst the ancients was his monopoly of power and his methods in achieving it. Figures such as Plato took a negative stance and viewed Pericles as a demagogue whose methods of achieving power were harmful to the state.
Yet there was a positive tradition towards Pericles, which viewed him as a good aristocratic ruler. Writers such as Thucydides put forward this point of view, Therefore a major theme of the Life is the defence of Pericles against the charges of acting as a tyrant and demagogue. Plutarch does this not by denying Pericles used what could be seen as demagogic methods, but by arguing that his use of power was beneficial to Athens and thus justified his actions.
So how was Plutarch able to portray Pericles as a good aristocratic ruler in chapter 39 of the Life, when many of his early actions appear to be those of a demagogue? Gomme has argued that Pericles' character simply changes halfway through the biography, and he goes from being a demagogue to the noble leader we see at the end of the Life, but I do not agree with this view. For example, he points out that Plutarch says Pericles chased popular support against his own nature, Thus it was not a change in Pericles' character, but in his political circumstances, that allowed him to act as the almost monarchical leader we see described in chapter 39.
To further elevate Pericles, Plutarch contrasts him to his successors in an incredibly positive light. The politicians who came after Pericles are described as "a rich crop and hoard of evil", who Pericles had kept from harming the state. He takes the case of Cimon, and argues that "the failures of his successors do not diminish his achievement, they heighten it: they project the gloom against which Cimon's brilliance stands out". This method of comparison to elevate a protagonist is a common form of writing in biography. For example, in Xenophon's encomium of Agesilaus he compares Agesilaus and the Persian King. Thus we can see that not only does Plutarch defend Pericles from the charge of being a demagogue, but in this extract he also compares him to later demagogues in order to increase his status.
Because Plutarch wrote biographies with a moral theme, rather than histories, he sometimes puts his own spin on events in order to show virtues or make a point, and this is evident in the extract I am discussing. For example, Pericles did not have a particularly impressive military record. Therefore, rather than attempt to show him as a traditional conquering hero, Plutarch took the opposite view and praised Pericles for his self-restraint and caution. For example, in chapter 39 he talks of Pericles' "self-possession, which he maintained throughout all the troubles and hostility that beset him". Thus a decision that could be seen as cowardly is in fact turned into a virtue by Plutarch.
In chapters 38-9 Plutarch appears to be so concerned with showing Pericles in a positive light that he ignores events that contradict the image he presents. For example, he says that Pericles led Athens in "a blameless and unblemished fashion", He also claims that Pericles never treated an enemy as irreconcilable, Furthermore, on his deathbed Pericles claims that no Athenian citizen put on mourning clothes because of him. This would thus reinforce the image of Pericles as a cautious, self-controlled general, yet by doing this Plutarch ignored deaths that could have been avoided by following a different policy.
This extract of Plutarch's It shows Pericles' virtues of calmness, self-control and lack of superstition, whilst also defending him from the charge of being a demagogue. It shows common methods that appear both in ancient biographical writing, such as comparison between the protagonist and other figures in order to elevate the former, and in Plutarch's own writing, such as using criticisms and taunts, or ignoring some aspects of his subject's career in order to show virtue.