If one embarks on a study of determiners and other prenominal modifiers, one central problem emerges quickly: categorisation. Almost every publication features its own classification of what a determiner is, what subcategories there are, and on what grounds to distinguish them. To answer the questions at the heart of this essay in detail, a systematic overview of the most prominent approaches to premodifier categorisation would be helpful. Unfortunately, this would exceed the time and space constraints evident in this assignment; therefore the different classifications of various scholars will only be referred to when they are of immediate relevance to the essay questions. The first question will be dealt with in section 2, the second question in section 3 of this paper.
As the first essay question calls for a distinction between determiners and other prenominal modifiers, section 2 will be headed by a very brief outline of what elements are categorised as determiners within the scope of this paper. This endeavour may seem rather basic, but in the face of extremely varying definitions in the literature it should be deemed important to set a parameter that the other elements can be compared against, before engaging in an analysis of borderlines.
Determiners are a category that hosts very different semantic notions. This fact explains the wide variation of different classification systems that have been introduced.
Downing and Locke distinguish between two main types of determination: deictic and quantifying (Downing and Locke 2002:436). These two groups are divided into various subtypes, and deictic determiners can also be divided into specific and non-specific. Huddleston (1984:354-399), on the other hand, distinguishes the articles from 14 types of "other" determinatives, with exact, but rather small categories like "alternative-additive determinative" (
A lot of efforts have been made to categorise determiners according to their semantics. The grammatical behaviour of such categories has mainly been linked to the position of their members within the noun group. Berk (1999:58) and Quirkal. (1985:256) have published an account of which type of noun head can be specified by which types of determiners. However, it only gives information on which determiners occur with singular count, plural count and/or noncount nouns, and these co-occurrences are not linked with a coherent semantic parallel.
The only semantic classes that display a distinct grammatical behaviour seem to be the types outlined in section 2.1. The position of articles, genitives, demonstratives and interrogatives in the noun group is fixed: they occupy the central position amongst the elements before any epithets, classifiers and the head noun. Quantifiers however can be found in all three determiner positions, although the central position can only host exact quantifiers like
The quantifiers
Thus, taking into account a few exceptions and bearing in mind the difficult case of quantifying determiners, it seems possible to assign a distinct grammatical behaviour to certain semantic classes of determiners.
The answer to the first essay question, "How do we distinguish determiners from other elements that premodify nouns in English?", has shown that there are relatively reliable checks to distinguish between determiners and other prenominal modifiers. Section 2 however, dedicated to the second essay question, has shown that distinguishing between different semantic classes within the determiner category is not a question of clear-cut boundaries and obvious perspectives. But it is possible to point out some "semantic classes of determiners that behave in grammatically distinct ways", at least as to their typical position in the noun phrase.