In the multitude of semantic relations that can exist between words, the phenomena of polysemy and homonymy are not the only ones with overlapping boundaries and fuzzy edges. But to assign a case of "one word, more than one meaning" to one of those categories often seems more difficult than to determine cases of synonymy, oppositeness or hyponymy, for example. This is even more unfortunate given that this particular difference is so important for every lexicographer, as they have to decide whether to file the different meanings associated with one particular word as one entry or separate entries.
This paper takes a look at possible approaches to distinguish cases of homonymy from cases of polysemy and aims to evaluate them according to their effectiveness and coherence. In order to provide the foundation to this discussion in section 4, section 2 to will briefly outline the concept of homonymy and section 3 the concept of polysemy.
Homonyms are different words of the same language that accidentally happen to have the same form, but whose meanings are not related to each other, like The dictionary (Concise English Oxford Dictionary 2002) defines  To determine whether it is a case of absolute or partial homonymy, the words in question must fulfil the following three conditions:
(Lyons 1995:55)
In the case of Condition 2 seems to be satisfied as well because both They also fulfil condition 3, as they can appear in the same syntactical environment, e.g. as a Direct Object, as the head of a noun group:
Therefore the sense relationship between
Partial homonymy is evident in the relationship between In the first of the two entries, the dictionary (Concise Oxford English Dictionary 2002) lists a number of meanings, among them "moving or capable of moving at high speed". The entry for Both meanings are clearly not related, so condition 1 is satisfied. To check whether condition 2 is satisfied as well, it is helpful to list the forms that both lexemes can take:
The above list shows that condition 2 is not fulfilled. In this case, this is due to the difference in grammatical properties. The fact that As one of the three conditions is not satisfied,
Within the concept of homonymy, there are two special types that can occur: homography and homophony. In cases of homography, the shape that both lexemes share is graphical, whilst it is phonological in the case of homophony (Goddard 1998:18). Homographs are pronounced differently although their spelling is the same, like
Words that display a relationship of polysemy agree in form but disagree in meaning, too. But in contrast to cases of homonymy, the distinct meanings of polysemous lexemes are closely related (Hurford and Heasley 1983:123). Without a detailed analysis of According to the dictionary, which conventionally groups both and several other related meanings in one entry, (Concise Oxford English Dictionary 2002), The meaning of The relationship between the two represents an extension, a transference of meaning from one domain to the other, in this case from the human body, a typical source domain, to a wider context, so that the basic sense could possibly be applied to every physical entity in the world. To a smaller extent, this existence of secondary, transferred meanings, i.e. polysemy, is the case with a lot, if not most lexemes (Goddard 1998:19). But Goddard also points out that in addition to being closely related, the meanings of polysemous words also have to be clearly distinct. When a single, general sense can be applied in different contexts, like the adjective wrong, which can mean "untrue" or "immoral" depending on the speech situation, it is is not a case of polysemy but of 'generality' (Goddard 1998:19).
Homonymy and polysemy, as outlined in section 2 and 3, are two distinct categories. However, in some cases the categorisation is not as salient as in the examples above. When deciding whether two identical lexemes with different meanings should be classified as homonymy or polysemy, a number of criteria are often of help. The most common ones are etymology and "relatedness of meaning" (Lyons 1995: 58).
The etymological criterion says that if both lexemes have the same historical origin, they should be treated as a case of polysemy rather than homonymy (Palmer 1981:102). Therefore they should be listed under the same entry in a dictionary, like In the Concise Oxford English Dictionary (2002), a number of potential meanings of Among them are "a person in the same position or otherwise associated with another" ( Their common historical origin is Old English In this case, a common historic origin between But this kind of lay assumptions can lead to wrong conclusions about the etymology of lexemes. This "popular etymology" (Lyons 1995:59) can sometimes hamper the native speaker's intuition about whether two words are related in a polysemic or homonymous way. In most cases however, the native speaker's judgement is proven right by etymology (Lyons 1995:59).
Palmer mentions a number of examples of misleading history (Palmer 1981:102). One would imagine, for example, that Yet, according to etymology, the two lexemes have different origins. Both originate from Old English, but Thus they are listed as two separate entries.
 However, Palmer lists them as an example of unexpected shared etymology, i.e. polysemy (Palmer 1981:102). A look at the origin of both entries exposes the difficulty of this categorisation: Both lexemes have developed from Old French But in the development of the meaning of It seems likely that
The question of the connection between As mentioned above, the relatedness between the two lexemes, i.e. their semantic similarity is an important factor in distinguishing homonymy from polysemy. In section 3, metaphorical extension was outlined as a major indicator of polysemous relationships. However, when the semantic criterion calls for closely related meaning in order to establish a case of polysemy, it has to be noted that semantic relatedness is a continuum rather than a binary parameter. This poses a difficulty to determining whether two words are closely related or not. Goddard exemplifies this problem through It seems a matter of personal judgement whether the fact that both actions involve a notion of 'forwarding in leaps' justifies their categorisation as polysemy. Exactly how closely related two lexemes must be to qualify for the label 'polysemy' is indefinable. Thus the semantic criterion is restricted in terms of its applicability as well.
Palmer suggests a third way of differentiating between polysemy and homonymy: the identification of a central, or core meaning as an indication for polysemy (Palmer 1981:105). But this strategy, so he argues, can only be fruitful if the type of relatedness is of a metaphorical nature. In cases like
After examining the major approaches to the question at the beginning of this essay, "Can homonymy and polysemy be distinguished?", a clear answer seems impossible. The etymological criterion provides a sufficient tool to differentiate between the two in a lot of cases, but unfortunately not in all cases, because history does not always reflect current use accurately. The semantic criterion, which puts history aside and basically asks if the meanings are related, is not without flaws either. This is due to the nature of the concept of relatedness, which is, as most semantic categorisations, a matter of degree rather than of binary opposites. These two criteria are the best that have been found so far. Neither the search for core meaning nor any other tests have a similar success rate. However, the etymological and the semantic criterion do not account for enough cases of "one word, more than one meaning" as to be considered effective means of theoretical distinction. Thus the distinction that lexicographers have to make when deciding on how many meanings they record within one dictionary entry depends, in some cases, not only on etymology and metaphor, but also on their intuition. In the end, the general distinction between homonymy and polysemy must be made from a practical point of view, as theory repeatedly proves to be inadequate.