This report aims to analyze the relationship between GDP and imports of goods and services of three countries with different economic status. The countries are - United States (a developed country), India (a developing country) and Sierra Leone (a less developed country). Countries with different economic status are chosen in order to facilitate the differentiation of the variation between the characteristics of countries with different GDP levels and growth rates. For example, a developed country, the US, has much higher imports compared to a developing and less developed country, although the level of its imports constitutes only to a small part of its total GDP. This difference in imports portrays the GDP gap between a developed country and a less developed country.
GDP and imports are chosen as indicators of economic development. It is expected that countries with high GDP levels will also have high import levels, however not high enough to drive the country into a trade deficit. Whilst a less developed country is expected to show unstable levels of imports (because of an unstable economy and unstable exchange rates) and thus will be expected to show signs of having trade deficits. The data have been further investigated by applying correlation and regression analysis between GDP and import figures of each country.
The GDP and import values are ranged from 1970 to 2003, which have been acquired from the World Bank database The GDP values and import values are in US dollar 1995 constant prices, which implies that the values between 1970 and 2003 have accounted for inflation, and thus have been converted to real GDP and real import figures. Likewise, to make our data comparable with each other, the GDP and import values of all three countries are in a single currency, US dollars.
According to economic theory imports can depend on multiple factors such as the level and dynamics of domestic income of economic integration. However, with respect to the aim of our analysis the emphasis will merely lie on the relationship between Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and imports. By definition, GDP is seen to be a measure of aggregate output in the national income accounts equalling the sum of incomes earned domestically by both nationals and foreign citizens working in the country In relation to imports, GDP has to consider the level and dynamics of the GDP components and thus differentiate between them i.e. investment, consumption, public expenditure and exports However, economic theory - ceteris paribus - suggests that when GDP rises imports rise as well, for example because disposable income increases. In real life on the other hand, there are many exceptions to this rule.
Overtime the general trend GDP seems to follow is a steadily increasing one. The reasoning behind this is the following: as free market economies aim to maximize GDP they will produce at least the same output in subsequent years as they have in previous ones. In addition however they will aim to increase the level of output by improving the factors of production, i.e. the standard of the machinery by expanding industries or creating new ones. Therefore, overtime GDP will - due to the improvements that are likely to be made - increase. The extent to which this is the case varies in different economies. This reasoning however, does not apply to economies in a state of emergency such as civil wars or natural disasters (as is the case in many less developed countries i.e. Sierra Leone). This is due to the devastation of the economy. Similarly, imports can be said to generally be increasing over time. This can be justified by referring to the way that GDP determines the level of imports, meaning given that (for the above reasons) GDP increases overtime, imports must also rise overtime.
However, since imports have a negative effect on the current account of the balance of payments, governments often choose to impose import restrictions or protectionist measures such as the introduction of value added taxes or quotas. This coupled with the general national attitude towards foreign goods may manipulate the consumer in such a way that the above relationship does not apply. Yet, as long as free market forces operate without governmental or other intervention, it can be said that imports as well as GDP increase overtime.
After all, our analysis makes it obvious that there is a positive relationship between the two economic figures under discussion, GDP and imports. Generally, GDP tends to increase over time, so do imports. As far as our empirical data is concerned, this is the case with respect to the USA and India. Sierra Leone however, seems to be an exception as there is no constant correlation between the two economic indicators. Therefore, in conclusion it can be said that one needs to differentiate between the state of an economy when applying economic theory. In this case, this refers to the fact that a less developed, unstable country like Sierra Leone does not follow economic theory that developed and developing countries follow.