Density is defined as mass/volume;
Specific Gravity is (mass of substance)/(mass of an equally volume of water).
The aim of these experiments is to measure particle density(or solid density), bulk density and porosity for apple, potato, peas and dried milk powder.
In this lab report, I recorded the following 4 experiments:
The density of water is 1000kg/m In the first experiment, the result show the apple should sink in water, but as we discovered, apple usually float in water, which means the density of apple should be less than water. In that case, the first way of calculating density is not accurate for apple is not spherical. It is the same theory for the second experiment.
The density of a substance is equal to the mass of the substance divided by the volume that it occupies.
There might be still some errors exist.
The fact is, the density of a substance will change when the temperature is different.
'Density differences in heated fluids provide the driving force for natural convection.'
(Taken from the course book, page 52)
In a word, density decreases as a increasing in temperature.
Bulk density is the density of the bulk material under these conditions which include the volume of the air:
In comparison, while we calculate Particle density, we do not count the volume of the air. Particle density refer to the density of an individual unit:
To be noticed, for the last experiment: Dried Milk Powder, the bulk density can be affected by the solids content of the feed, prior to drying and the suddenly inlet and outlet air temperatures.
Porosity is the fraction of the total volume taken up by air.
All in all, the relationship between porosity, bulk density and particle density is given by: Porosity
so:
In those experiments, we determined the density and specific gravity of a range of food by measuring the bulk density of solid and using specific gravity bottle to determine the particle density. What's more, this report help me understand the difference of Bulk density and Particle density, and the relationship of them and porosity.