Vinegar is a dilute solution of acetic acid, so that it can be titrated with a base. Titration is the process of adding a known amount of a solution of known concentration to a know amount of solution of unknown concentration. In this experiment, we use the sodium hydroxide solution to determine the total acidity of 3 vinegar samples.
The method used to measure the total acidity of the vinegar being studied is called acid-base titration, which is an analytical chemistry technique.
For an acid-base titration, the chemical reaction in general is:
and for the titration of the vinegar in this experiment, the following reaction will be used to calculate the acetic acid content of the vinegar sample:
Sodium hydroxide is the standard reactant solution for this titration, and acetic acid the calculated unknown reactant.
The end point in this experiment is to use an acid/base indicator. An acid/base indictor is a colored substance with more than two different colors depending on the value of the pH of the solution. Indicators are also very weak acids or bases and react with added acid or base (when no other base or acid is present in a solution). Phenolphthalein is the indicator used in this experiment, and phenolphthalein is colorless in acid and neutral solutions, however it is pink in basic solutions. The phenolphthalein will change color with the addition of a single drop of sodium hydroxide if no other acid (acetic acid for this experiment) is present in the phenolphthalein-sodium hydroxide solution.
We use burettes to do this experiment, and burette can be read to the nearest 0.01 milliliters, which means the number we recorded is significant.
Another important concept in this experiment is concentration. Concentration refers to the composition of a solution and may be expressed as the ratio of solute/solvent or solute/solution. Two units of concentration expressing the latter ratio are:
and
Molarity is a convenient laboratory unit that delivers for a measured the volume of solution a known number of solute molecules (i.e. moles of solute). Percent is a familiar concept to most people and for this reason percent by mass is used on many labels.
All in all, in dilute aqueous solutions, the actual acidity of solution is activity of the conjugate acid of water, and the negative decadic-( What's more, the total acidity of vinegar have been determined by acid-base titration.