Data was collected from 250 respondents on their chocolate spending habits from major supermarket retailers in the London area.
The data analysis software SPSS was then used to analyse this data.
Expenditure on chocolate was categorised into three groups; standard, organic and fair-trade.
Chocolate spending banded by age group shows that proportionality more is spent by the oldest age groups than younger (the 45+ age group spends approximately twice as much on chocolate than any other age group).
The general trend shows that shoppers of more affluent supermarkets (such as Waitrose) spend more on chocolate than those of less affluent supermarket chains (such as Kwiksave) - Waitrose customers spend more than four times more on chocolate than Kwiksave customers.
Customers with children are likely to spend, on average, significantly more on chocolate than those without - they are likely to spend 2.5 times as much.
There is a strong correlation between the amount of television viewed and expenditure on chocolate. Those who watch large amounts of television spend up to six times as much on chocolate as those who watch less.
The chocolate market within the UK is vast. Chocolate accounts for 37% of the confectionary sector and in 2003 this would have been estimated to have a market value of 3.7 billion. The UK also tops the table for consumption of chocolate across Europe with the average person consuming 10kilos per year.
The chocolate market is now fairly mature and growth through until 2007 is expected to slow - the chocolate market is under particular pressure from increasing interest in diet and health. In recent years, for example, supermarkets have been forced to remove chocolate bars from the checkout areas. Certain sectors within the market are still open to rapid growth. This includes the fair-trade market which is expected to double over the next few years.
The Easter and Christmas periods continue to be major sales areas for the confectionary market and this is particularly true with respect to chocolate and is particularly competitive amongst the major retailers.
This study showed that the oldest age group tended to spend more (approximately twice as much) on chocolate than the three younger age groups. It may at first be expected that this is due to the fact that this group is, twice the size of any of the other three and, this could account for this. However, the age groups were categorised into four groups of approximately equal size and this can be confirmed from looking at the table in the appendix. This, therefore, does not account for this trend. The trend may be accounted for by the fact that, the older age group are more likely to have children and that their expenditure is as a result of this, rather than them, personally, eating more chocolate. Another explanation may be that the older age groups do just prefer chocolate and, therefore, spend more on chocolate. It may be that the chocolate they consume is more expensive and they therefore (by weight) eat equal quantities to the younger age groups. This could be confirmed with the further research mentioned investigating the sale by volume of chocolate bars.
From the point of view of Sainsbury's, it can be seen that by total expenditure they are clear market leaders in the '45+' age group. They have a strong presence in the reaming three age groups too. It may therefore be suggested to try and aim any marketing to these three age groups (i.e. the under 45's) to increase sales, whilst keeping an eye on the '45+' age group.
Analysis of the data has also shown that customers who had children spent far more on chocolate than those without. With the current market, however, it cannot be recommended that this is a market that should be pursued. There is currently a lot of interest in reducing the amount of 'junk food' aimed at children. It would therefore be recommended that, whilst an important area of the market, this is not one that should positively be chased at the moment.
Perhaps one of the strongest correlations observed is between the expenditure on chocolate and the amount of time spent watching television. As has previously been pointed out, those customers categorised as 'heavy' watchers of television spent six times as much on chocolate as those who were categorised in the 'low' group. This has the potential to be a very strong market. Advertising campaigns for chocolate, could be conducted for Sainsbury's on television as the target audience will be captive. Other strategies such as positioning chocolate near DVD's (if present in the store) should actively be pursued.