An incident at the local jewellers has occurred; it is believed that the offender gained access by levering out a windowpane from its metal painted frame. Visible tool on the frame back up this assumption.
The suspect Mr Y was arrested an hour after the incident in close proximity to the scene where his clothing was seized. He denies the accusations saying he was in watching TV all night. No implement was recovered from he suspect or scene.
The SOCO removed a control sample of the paint from the scene.
The clothing was searched and the debris collected inside a petri dish.
There was about three tablespoons worth of debris collected from the clothing.
Which consisted of a variety of materials including: -
In more detail: - Paint- On inspection with the unaided eye- the blue flake was blue on one side and white on the other this side also has traces of glue, it was 4mm by 2mm in size. The green flake was green on both sides with no trace of glue; it was 5mm by 3mm in size.
Their were two types of metallic paint the first was dark blue and appeared different from the other flakes of paint, as it was thicker, the two pieces were 1.5mm by 1.5mm and 1mm by 1mm in size. The magnolia flake was magnolia on both sides; it was about 1mm by 2mm in size.
The sugar, salt, glass and quartz pieces which all appear very similar when viewed by the unaided, were differentiated by consideration of the fact that, salts have a regular cubic shape when observed under a microscope and sugars have a more irregular shape.
The glass and quartz fragments were separated using appearance also as quartz is more opaque and smooth in appearance compared to glass fragments. There were two fragments of glass one 2mm by 1mm in size and the other 1mm by 0.5mm. The opaque fragment was 1mm by 1mm.
The amount of soil, grass seeds and small rocks that were recovered from the suspects clothing can probably be explained by the information obtained from the interview the police carried out. During which the suspect claimed that he had a fight with another individual outside the local public house, when he states to have fallen into the wet muddy roadside.
The control paint sample was 8mm by 7mm in size, and was attached to a piece of wood/venire. It became apparent using the microscope that it consisted of two layers the top a thin layer magnolia in colour and the bottom a thicker white colour.
The flake of magnolia paint identified in part one was removed and examined next to the control sample of paint, it was observed that the two samples matched this was because they both consisted of two different layers, the top one of each being a thinner magnolia coloured layer and the bottom a thicker white coloured layer.
I at this point made a reasonable assumption that the two samples matched meaning that the magnolia paint flake recovered from the suspected offenders clothing did come from the scene.
Considering the information gathered in parts three and four I would now carry out an FITR analysis on both of the magnolia coloured paint fragments.