The principle aim of the project is to develop a PDA application with which a user can see information regarding the geography of the area they are in. More specifically, the project will focus on displaying an accurate drawing of the skyline and labelling any hills that feature.
Alongside the PDA application there will be a PC application, with which the user can select the area that they intend to use the PDA in, and have the relevant data made available to the PDA.
This interim report is to discuss progress made thus far, and also to amend and create plans for the remainder of the project period.
There exist programs for viewing maps in 3D on a computer. Examples are Google Earth [1], ESRI ArcGIS [2], and Memory-Map [3].
There also exist programs for viewing maps and geographic features on a PDA. Examples are ESRI ArcPad [4] and Mobile Memory Map [3].
Both of these examples, and indeed all other existing products I have looked at, will only show the world in plan, as a map. My project, therefore, is to do what, it seems, has not been done, and combine the two by showing geographic data on a PDA that is not in plan.
When the user enters their co-ordinates, the system will draw the horizon, and label all the hills. The user will have an easy interface so that they can scroll through the horizon. They will also be able to get other information, for example their current height, or the height of a particular mountain they can see.
There will be a supporting PC application which will allow the user to choose what data is supplied to the PDA, as well as having extra functionality, for example displaying the horizon for any given point.
The user will also be able to define markers, for example their route's start point or the place they intend to have lunch, which will feature in the horizon on the PDA whether or not they can actually see them.
This is a report of my progress, 6 months after writing the preliminary report.
As the Gantt chart above indicates, my plan is to first finish the PDA application. This should be done in about a week, and at this point I will write the PC application and take the PDA application to Snowdonia to test it in the field. The PC application should take between 3 and 4 weeks.
Towards the end of the implementation period for the PC application I will demonstrate both applications, then I will perform full testing and add any other features that seem necessary. I will then start work on the final report.
The requirements for the project have changed substantially since the preliminary report due to what has been learned from the prototype. For this reason, it is very difficult to compare the Gantt chart in the preliminary report with that of this report and decide whether or not I am on schedule.
I believe, however, that I am on schedule as I have completed all the algorithms and the entire system has been designed. The implementation of the PDA application has been far faster than I was expecting because I am so familiar with the workings of the algorithms. I am hoping that the PC application will be just as swift to implement, in which case I will be ahead of schedule.
I think if I continue at my current rate, I should finish well in time for the deadlines.
The PDA application is running slower than I was expecting, however, but this is due to the speed of the PDA rather than the algorithms. I will make the code as efficient as possible to increase the speed. I have realised that memory space is less of an issue on a PDA than processor speed, as usually only one program is running at once. Therefore it is generally better to perform one calculation and store the result to use again than to repeat a calculation. I have made the program, therefore, calculate the distance from the observer to everywhere on the map before the horizon algorithm runs. This means that these will not need to be recalculated.
I am extremely pleased with the accuracy of the horizon, as supported by the tests I made with ArcGIS.