Flying Brain refers to an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV), which can remain balance autonomously when encountering unpredictable disturbances. This means that the UAV can regulate its attitude in an environment immediately. Civil and military applications of autonomous flying vehicles have been steadily increasing over the last few years. Traffic surveillance, air pollution monitoring, area mapping, agricultural application, and the remote inspection require high maneuverability and robustness with respect to disturbances [1]. For an UAV, the ability of keeping balance by itself instead of been manipulated by a human can make it more intelligent to meet the requirement of the task. A novel method of using a microcontroller as control centre to process the control loop between a remote controlled helicopter Draganflyer IV Figure 1.and a camera based inclinometer sensor will be displayed in this paper.
Control of UAVs in flight is a large area of interest in current research. For landed system vehicles, only the forward and backward movement associated with the steering control need be considered. Whole the system can be supported into a stationary position by the wheels or some similar stuff. However, for an air dynamic system without ground support, more complicated freedom degrees are on the object. Meanwhile, three rotational axis pitch, roll and yaw are engaged into the movement system. In order to maintain a level hover, UAV need feel the impact which cause the incline in both pitch and roll axis. Inevitably, the vibration from the motor of UAV can not be ignored and it will cause the error when testing incline. To ensure the craft could maintain balance with the unpredictable disturbance, a sensor system need give the feedback to the control centre to support the measurement of incline promptly and accurately.
The novel solution to the problem described utilises a vision device coupled spirit vial. The sensors' processor retrieves images from the camera, using them to locate the air bubble within the search environment.[2] This project is partly finished by Chris Vanstone [3], what he has done is that successfully establish a camera based inclinometer. In order to measure the incline of a UAV in both axis to allow autonomous hover, which require a fresh rate of 10Hz or greater, at a resolution of 6' over a 5range. The prototype built utilises a small black and white CCD array camera to retrieve images in composite video format which are then analysed in a C++ designed program to locate the bubble position in the dual vial. This inclinometer provided results to indicate that the novel approach could generate measurements with an accuracy and precision sufficient for the application. [2]
So the sensor's measurement on the vial which indicates the incline can be produced and displayed on the PC. To control the present UAV which has DC motors coupled with four blades, the feedback information from the camera sensor should be converted into the control signal for the motors. When the UAV flying, it need test the level from sensor and analyse the result. However, the information retrieved by the camera attached on the UAV has to be transmitted into a computer (PC), therefore it is not effective enough. Moreover, the UAV has to carry the power and data tethers, which are for camera interfacing with pc, which make the whole device not entirely mobile.
To solve this problem, microcontroller can be utilised to be the control centre replacing PC. It is able to receive the information from inclinometer sensor and design a control algorithm to calculate out four different Pulse-Width-Modulations(PWM) that can manipulate four blades to keep a constant attitude of this UAV. Unfortunately, the camera supported is VCM 3612-00 CCD camera that retrieves images in black and white converting them into composite video format. It's hard for microcontroller which can process the data format signal to take in the video signal and analyse it. So the CMUcam (Figure 2.) which is a kind of robot vision sensor is used to substitute for VCM 3612-00. In the following paragraph, a novel approach working with CMUcam and microcontroller for the UAV will be illuminated.
In this project, the CMUcam coupled with the dual vial which is the main component of sensor system and PIC (a kind of microcontroller) with its circuit board are mainly introduced.
The application of CMUcam can make the bubble tracking much easier and it helps calculate out the location of the bubble to share some burdens of PIC. Moreover, it can directly output the digital signal to PIC. From the experiments, it can be seen that the 17 frames per second speed of capture the image is good enough for transmitting movement information of bubble, because when change the level of dual vial, correspondingly the motors speed change swiftly.
However, the control algorithm designed in PIC is not optimized, because the finished algorithm can only change the duty of PWM directly to modify the motor speed when the error of location is in the control area without searching the best path to realize the duty change, so for the air system, it is easy to lead the four blades helicopter into pendulum condition. So the genetic algorithm could be introduced into the current programming to optimize the most effective path to generate the four PWM duty changes.