Autoregressive exogeneous (ARX) model is mainly used for prediction and control target. This assignment will display how to implement the recursive least squares in the MATLAB to solve the problem. At the beginning, the algorithm is applied to do recursive least squares identification. Subsequently, a mechanical "master" robot of a master/slave tele-manipulator will be identified using some provided real data. At last, the RLS algorithm is extended through introduced the instrument variables.
The ARX is firstly used to identify a model given input and output, and the number of numerator and denominator coefficients. At the beginning of the algorithm, the variable Na, Nb, LN and the true value of A, B are initialized. The function "filter()" is used to calculate the true response of the system, meanwhile the step and random are taken as input to be generated. Theta and P(0) are also initialized, and then perform the recursive least square(RLS) (5),(6),(7),(9) for each output point to estimate the parameters. At last, print out the theta and plot the estimated parameters to compare with the true one. Furthermore, add the noise to the output for comparison with the noiseless one.
In this section, the Recursive least square is now used to identify a real world system from measured input and output data. Data is collected twice with different values for proportional and derivative gain in the system controller. The stability of each of the two set-ups can be indicated by plotting the poles on a Z plane.
Y vector can be produced by the M file "loadass", and take it as the output data of the step input. So they can construct a model to generate the estimated parameters A and B, then the estimated response for the step input is predicted by the "filter" function.
Due to the initials "wx", the two data file in number 25 are loaded into the vector y, and the following pairs are initialized respectively in the algorithm: Na=2 Nb=2; Na=3 Nb=2; Na=3 Nb=3; Na=4 Nb=3. Each of the 4 conditions has 3 associated graphs: pole position, estimated parameter convergence and the estimated response with the actual response.
The disturbance is considered as no relationship with input in the least square algorithm. However, the disturbance can influence the quality of the model fit greatly. An instrumental variable (IV) can be used in regression analysis to produce a consistent estimator when the explanatory variables are correlated with the error terms. So the IV can be introduced into the RLS to generate recursive instrument least squares algorithm.
In this section, in order to compare the results produced by the algorithm with those obtained in part b, the noise is added and the formula of the algorithm is modified into recursive instrument least squares after initializing the instrument variables Z.
The same data file is loaded into the vector y as part b and just select one setting Na=4 Nb=3 which is the best model to do the comparison.
In the pole position graph, one pole is found that outside the unit circle, which implies that the model will be unstable, unlike those graphs in part B, poles found there are all within the unit circle, the models in part B are relatively stable. It is obvious to discover that the estimated response can follow the actual response at the beginning, but when algorithm iteration goes on, the estimated response oscillates dramatically. So the IV approach is not suitable for all the models, and it depends on the different model.
The ARX model is the simplest model incorporating the stimulus signal. The estimation of the ARX model is the most efficient of the polynomial estimation methods because it is the result of solving linear regression equations in analytic form. Through the experiments and comparison of part b, it is known that the ARX model is preferable, especially when the model order is high. The disadvantage of the ARX model is that the model is easy to be influenced by the noise.