Today's businesses represent large and long-term investments that must make good business sense and be protected from obsolescence in the current dynamic and rapid business environment. Today's business requirements are therefore:
This is why intelligent buildings are increasingly important to businesses. An intelligent building is one that incorporates a system to monitor and optimize services such a heating, lighting, security, alarms, ventilation and air conditioning. Such a system enables efficiency and reliability in all these dimensions whilst improving productivity.
A problem that is associated with the predicted world population growth and increased activity is inevitable increase in energy requirements. The current consumptions of energy by buildings and projected future consumptions indicate unsustainable buildings. Intelligent buildings are therefore an imperative consideration for the future. There will be a greater need for energy efficient, and perhaps autonomous, buildings that are more independent of conventional energy sources.
The concept of the "intelligent faade" proposes a more dynamic building shell. This is analogous to the human skin; which is waterproof, vapor-transmitting, self-repairing, sensitive membrane containing signal transmitting nerve endings and heating and cooling systems all within just a few millimeters of its surface. Similar to the human skin, the intelligent skin is sensitive and responsive to the external environment. The main feature of the intelligent skin is the ability to actively and automatically adjust the flow of energy through the building envelope by regulating and manipulating external elements as required. This would be achieved with the use of intelligent control systems, using only renewable resources and secondary heat gains to power a buildings comfort system. Minimization of energy usage in building can also be assisted by the use of active control mechanisms.
When observing the history of the evolution of buildings and extrapolating to the future according to certain patterns it is tempting to think that buildings are becoming more "biological" systems. The industrial revolution of 300 years ago provided technology that revolutionized buildings at their time. Subsequently, the information revolution that sparked some fifty years had also transformed the way buildings would function by providing computer and telecommunication technology allowing the development of systems that can measure, evaluate, and respond to change. As our technological progress continues to increase at an exponential rate building will rapidly evolve into more independent, efficient and intelligent entities.