To employ the Charpy Impact Test to notched specimens in order to measure the toughness of steels of different carbon compositions and their ductile to brittle transition behavior as a function of temperature. The investigation will analyse the effects of temperature, carbon content and heat treatment on the toughness of the steel.
The following experiments were undertaken:
Carbon and manganese have the largest affects on the transition (of ductile to brittle) temperature. An increase in carbon increases the transition temperature, shifting the relevant part of the curve to the right side of the graph. As a result of this, the brittle range for the steel increases whilst ductility range is decreased. The implication of this is that it affects the maximum impact energy the steel is able to withstand, thus the toughness.
Different types of steels vary in toughness, ranging from high toughness at all temperatures for austenitic steels to relatively brittle behaviour of martensitic steels. The toughness depends on the temperature and improves with increased temperatures.
The diagram below shows that there is an important difference at low temperatures between austenitic steels on the one hand and martensitic and ferritic steels on the other. Martensitic, ferritic and ferritic-austenitic steels are characterised by a transition in toughness, from tough to brittle behaviour, at the transition temperature.
For ferritic steel the transition temperature increases (with increasing carbon) where the steel becomes brittle at successively higher temperatures. For the ferritic-austenitic steels, there is a higher transition temperature as a result of the increased ferrite content (i.e. more brittle behaviour). It can be seen that austenitic steel do not exhibit a toughness transition as with the other steel types, but have high toughness at all temperatures, although it slightly decreases with lowering of temperature.
The following points can be deduced from the investigation on steels using charpy impact testing:
1) Tough materials absorb a lot of energy when fractured while brittle materials absorb very little energy.
2) Increasing the carbon content decreases the ductility, and therefore embrittles the steel, decreases the charpy impact energy.
3) The energy absorbed in the impact test of an alloy steel at a given test temperature in general increases with increasing tempering temperature.
4) The ductile to brittle transition curve allows us to know the effect of temperature on the fracture energy. The impact energy generally decreases with decreasing temperature as the yield strength increases and the ductility decreases.
5) If the steel has a sharp ductile to brittle transition then a transition temperature can be defined below which the material has poor toughness.
6) The charpy impact test can be used to analyse the relative toughness of different materials to aid the designer in the selection of materials.