This report will determine what factors affect the functionality of control systems and how to prevent instability by adding other devices to them. Seven systems are analysed ranging from mechanical to electronic systems. The systems will be simulated and modelled theoretically in order to give a full insight into the depth of control system analysis using different techniques. A select few of the systems had controllers within them to help increase response time and stability. Some systems responded with a lot of damping or less damping in the case of the underdamped system. It was shown, that the system(s) that had the best response were those which were critically damped. It was discovered that the critically damped systems had controllers within them to regulate the system.
Control and analysis of Control Systems has existed since the late 18 It is an area that started with the invention of the Fly Ball Governor by James Watt. Since then, many different examples of control systems have been designed, each with different properties.
The systems themselves may be mechanical, hydraulic, electronic, pneumatic etc, and exist virtually everywhere in society. Even animals and plants have types of control systems within themselves.[1] Mammals have the regulation of body temperature from homeostasis, and plants regulate the conversion of carbon dioxide into oxygen via photosynthesis.
However, the basis of each of these separate systems remains the same: to provide a form of regulation, via the feedback of information. The information exists as a range of different types of quantities, for instance force in a mechanical system or a voltage in an electronic system.[2]
The control system has three basic parts to it, if it is modelled as a black box. There is the input or the stimulus, the process (which is also denoted as a plant); which is the black box in the model, which uses the stimulus to create a suitable output; and a response. In reality the control system is more advanced than this containing hidden sub-processes and outputs in the overall system, which then helps to achieve the desired output of the system via feedback and regulation.
Control has many uses from basic experiments such as small electronic circuits, and mass spring systems, to the design of much larger grandiose systems such as solar tracking units, which consist, in turn of many smaller sub-systems.
Control is only easy if the engineer has the firm background and current understanding as to how to put the knowledge to good use, in order to analyse systems similar to the ones in this document.
These systems will be explored and analysed within this document, by using numerous mathematical techniques for theoretical responses, and the use of the MATLAB software for the simulated responses. To do this, the transfer function of the systems will be deduced both analytically and will also be simulated within the MATLAB environment, for a range of different systems, covering additional features to the system such as P.I.D and Lead-Lag control.
Both responses will be plotted on a step response graph, and these should line up over each other to indicate that both responses are the same. From these responses, Bode plots will be done on each individual system and will be analysed in order to ascertain properties of the system, for instance, the break frequency, which is the maximum frequency value the system will work at before noise and other factors make it less accurate and potentially unstable. These frequencies and other factors are vital to maintaining the best efficiency for the control system and to ensure it is working at its best potential.
The control systems modelled in this report are varied in what type of system they are and what variations of control they have. It has been found that the systems with extra control within them, such as the P.I.D control or the motor controller, had better response times than those which did not, such as the Lead Lag compensator which led to an underdamped response.
The systems that lacked any controllers had slower responses, which shows that by adding control and cancelling poles and zeroes, a better system (ideally critically damped) can be obtained.
The simulation of the electronic systems shows that Johnson noise can lead to attenuations in the response which causes disturbance. If in the case of the RLC circuit some more control was added, by placing another component into the system, then the attenuation could be reduced.
The Solar tracking unit was steadily improved until it was critically damped and had a fast reaction time. Modifications are made to control systems all the time in order to increase the response time or to change the damping within the system.