This project is focussed on the construction of a small mobile robot which will use ultrasonic sensors in order to navigate around a test environment. The robot will be designed using through hole and surface mount soldering, which will allow all of the components to be added to the board. The construction of the chassis will be made from aluminium. This will support the motors and the circuit board.
The robot will be programmed using MPLAB and Visual Studio.NET 2003 C Compiler. The hex file of code that will be created will be sent via a serial cable to a PIC16F87 on the circuit board. The PIC will send pulses to the motors to control their speeds. This method of data transmission is known as Pulse Width Modulation or PWM.
Once complete the robot will be able to navigate its way around both stationary and moving obstacles. The robot could then be modified in some ways to make it more efficient.
Sonar is still in widespread use as a ranging method on autonomous vehicles. It is an effective method to use as the robot successfully managed to navigate its way around many obstacles. The sonar sensors were positioned in such a way that would allocate a widespread field of 'vision'.
The only problem with the layout of the sensors was that there was a blind spot in the middle where the receiver was. This in turn caused the robot to ignore small obstacles, for instance chair legs and drive into them as they were not detected.
To solve this problem, the circuit could be redesigned to allocate a third transmitter in the middle of the robot. Also having more than one receiver would greatly improve the accuracy of the robot.
SMT or Surface Mount Technology is a good method of designing a robot as opposed to through hole soldering because it saves space, which is useful for designing compact circuit boards on more advanced robots. In the case of the robot that was designed for this report, it is still an improvement to through hole soldering as the overall size of the robot and resources used can be greatly reduced.