This report documents a model of communication system developed by Matlab and Simulink, in which various digital modulation schemes used and tested with relative performance easily compared in the implementation part. In order to investigate thoroughly, better methods and solutions are added to the system one by one, through which we can see an improved performance as well as a more complicated communication system. The analysis and discussion part gives an academic support for the results through comparisons and contracts and specifies merits and disadvantages of each scheme from both practical and theoretical aspects. Other features and technologies that may be applicable in the near future are mentioned and considered in the conclusion part together with an overall understanding of this gradually developed system.
This report provides a framework for understanding and evaluating the key elements and various methods involved in developing a DSP communication system.
There are three parts in a modern digital communication link, which are the transmitter (TX), transmission channel and the receiver (RX). The transmitter processes a message signal in order to produce a signal most likely to pass reliably and efficiently through the channel. So this usually includes modulation of a carrier signal by the information signal, coding of the signal to help correct for transmission errors, filtering of the message or modulated signal to constrain the occupied bandwidth, and power amplification to overcome channel losses. Inversely, the receiver function is principally to reverse the modulation processing in order to recover the message signal, attempting to compensate for any signal degradation introduced by the channel, which normally involve amplification, filtering, demodulation and decoding. The transmission channel is loosely defined as the electrical medium between source and destination and characterized by its attenuation, bandwidth, noise, interference and distortion.
In this report, we will concerned with choice of modulation method crucially affects the ease of implementation and the noise tolerance. These forms of digital data modulation such as BPSK, QPSK, 16PSK, 16QAM and 64QAM will be discussed later in the background part, tested and applied in the implementation part. With their BER or PER verse SNR plotted in a same diagram, we can get a relative performance to make research and draw conclusions about these various modulation solutions. The analysis will be done in two ways: one is between the M-ary PSK and single binary signaling (BPSK), the other is between phase shift keying (PSK) and quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM), which need to handle both amplitude and phase information.
As the system developing, convolutional coding is added to protect the data transmitted by adding redundancy. Convolutional contains blocks that implement convolutional encoding and decoding. We will test simple and NASA code, gradually placing state pinning, puncturing and packet data with CRC into the system. Different modeling schemes are given and bit/packet error rate performance are compared and contrasted along with theoretical grounding for the relevant results. It is important to trade off the merits and disadvantages of these solutions in different practical situation, such as transmission speed (band rate), reliability (noise immunity), power (linear amplitude) and complexity issues.
When it comes to multi-carrier modulation (OFDM), the system gets more powerful and complicated. So we use the IEEE 802.11a(Wireless LAN) model shipped with Matlab. When running this model, we can not only recognize the transmitter, channel and receiver parts clearly but also acquire a better understanding about each component's function. By examining the contents of the modulator banks, we will find that the NASA coding is used. By noticing how the OFDM data, the pilots and the training sequences are collected together and how the padding of 11 zeros at the end of each frame with the addition of the cyclic prefix, we will find that almost all solutions that we have tested and studied before are combined together in this advanced communication system, where each element works efficiently. In the no fading channel, by changing the channel SNR, it is easy to find out SNR range for each modulation scheme. Likely, we will also plot the PER against SNR in three propagation channels and indicate which portion of the SNR uses which modulation scheme and their separate data rate. In a word, this implementation is a general application of all the discussed methods in previous parts.
After the whole process, further issues and problems which arised with the practical application are discussed and analyzed in the conclusion part. For instance, the preference to more reliable slow data transmission or faster but less noise immunity transmission; the choice between PSK and QAM; the tradeoff between simpler coding schemes with CRC and retransmission of failed packets and more complicated coding schemes where no retransmission is possible; the decision of modulation schemes with a required SNR and a notionally acceptance PER; the other features needed when modeling the wireless communication and the other modulation and coding schemes that aren't discussed but also popular in digital data communication systems .etc.
The steps in this section basically are as follows:
Up to now, we have gained all the materials and proofs for the further analysis and discussions. In PSK modulation schemes (BPSK, QPSK and 16PSK), the instantaneous power out of the modulator is always 1, because points on their constellation is equispaced around a circle therefore the amplitude is a constant 1. However, it is not a constant for QAM modulation. Take the example of 16QAM, it has three instantaneous power: 0.33333, , and1. Refer to the figures below.
The graph above compares the bit-error rates of BPSK, QPSK, 16QAM, 16PSK and 64QAM. As we have mentioned in implementation part that the level of performance from good to bad is: BPSK, QPSK, 16QAM, 16PSK and 64QAM.
It is seen that higher-order modulations exhibit higher error-rates; in exchange however they deliver a higher raw data-rate.
BPSK is the simplest form of PSK. It is This modulation  has the best immunity to noise of all the PSKs since it takes serious distortion to make the demodulator reach an incorrect decision. It is, however, only able to modulate at 1bit/symbol and so is unsuitable for high data-rate applications.
With four phases, QPSK can encode two bits per symbol - twice the rate of BPSK. Analysis shows that this may be used either to double the data rate compared to a BPSK system while maintaining the bandwidth of the signal or to maintain the data-rate of BPSK but halve the bandwidth needed.
Any number of phases may be used to construct a PSK constellation but 16-PSK is usually the highest order PSK constellation deployed. With more than 16 phases, the error-rate becomes too high and there are better, though more complex, modulations available such as quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) after trading off the noise immunity, bandwidth and data rate. The reason of its better performance is that it achieves a greater distance between adjacent points in the I-Q plane by distributing the points more evenly. From the diagram we can see that the 16QAM modulation schemes perform 2 to 3 dB better than the 16PSK when the BER is the same, but it also pays the price that dealing with both the phase and amplitude.
64QAM has the biggest BER compared with other schemes in the same SNR. This is not hard to explain since it gets a notably high bit rate. It is suitable for the high data-rate less accuracy demanding applications.
Another thing to point out is that the bit error rate is different from symbol error rate, though in BPSK they have same value. QPSK is sending two bits per symbol while 16PSK and 16QAM are 4 and the 64QAM is 6. The quantity of bits is always a power of 2 and the power is the equal number of bits per symbol. So except for BPSK, the symbol error rate (SER) of other modulation schemes is bigger than the bit error rate (BER) for they all have to send more than one bit per symbol.
We can also see from the diagram that if the SNR is high, the probability of symbol error may be approximated and the BER will drop to acceptable level. And when SNR is low, no matter what kind of modulation schemes used, the BER is inevitably large.
An OFDM carrier signal is the sum of a number of orthogonal sub-carriers, with baseband data on each sub-carrier being independently modulated commonly using some type of QAM or PSK. The upstream and downstream speeds can be varied by allocating either more or fewer carriers for each purpose.
.
Comparing the three diagrams above, we find a similarity, that it the NASA coded with state-pinning (pink) is best in performance and then the one with puncturing (yellow) and the last is the uncoded one (blue).
From the comparison it is easy to find that the performance of NASA coded scheme is improved by adding state-pinning. By knowing the starting and terminal states of the packetised data, the decoder can quickly locate where to start. The traceback starts at a given state from irrespective of state metrics. In the same time we noticed that the model also runs faster than previously because there is one traceback per packet not per bit now.
The performance of NASA coded with puncturing is worse than the state-pinning one. By periodically removing bits from the encoded bit stream and inserting zeros to substitute for bits removed estimated by convolutional decoder, the chance of error increases as well as the code rate. But with puncturing, we can match the input data rate to the available channel bandwidth.
The uncoded one absolutely has the worst performance since the data being transmitted don't have any error detection and protection. So they will be more susceptible to the noise.
Likewise, the 16QAM has a similar response as BPSK, QPSK and 16PSK to these coding schemes.
Compare the BER and PER performance, we will find that they have similar results.
BPSK has the best performance since that it is simple, powerful and has the strongest
immunity to noises. The shortage is the slow data rate. The 16PSK has the high data rate but much more susceptible to noises. 16QAM has a better noise immunity compared to 16PSK considering they have a same symbol rate. Because it achieves a greater distance between adjacent points in the I-Q plane by distributing them more evenly. However, it has to handle both the phase and amplitude shifting and the transmission is more difficult than 16PSK due to the verifying power.
So when it comes to the complexity of transmission of the system, the 16PSK is easier to implement. In the applications that doesn't require a demanding precision but preferring to the facility of transmission, we can choose 16PSK over 16QAM.
Contrast the CRC coding with the state-pinning NASA coding, we can still find a obvious improvement on the BER performance. Though the state-pinning NASA coding has the best performance among those coding schemes that introduced above, the CRC coding is superior to it. Because the CRC placed in the transported packet can detect errors and guarantee the reliable error free packet of data.
From the diagram 4.8, we can find that for a notionally acceptance PER of 10%, the required SNR for the modulation schemes are about:
From the diagram above, we can see a three different average PER vs SNR performances. No fading is that there is no noise and no echo in the system, flat fading is noise without echo while dispersive fading is noise with echo. So of course we will estimate that the performance will be the No fading best, flat fading second and dispersive fading last. In fact, the estimation is indeed true that the simulation and result have already shown. When the SNR is very small, which means a relatively weak signal, the PER will be very big. Even though the noise is almost zero, like the no fading system, the average PER still reaches 77dB. As a result, we should try to avoid the situation of weak signals and weak noises in real applications.
M-ray modulation schemes are more bandwidth efficient but more susceptible to noise compared with single-ary schemes.
QPSK modulation is robust, but requires some form of linear amplification.
16QAM has the largest distance between points, but requires very linear amplification.16PSK has less stringent linearity requirements, but has less spacing between constellation points, and is therefore more affected by noise.
Except for PSK and QAM, there are many other modulation schemes that can be used in the model, such as ASK, FSK and so on. All of them have their merits and disadvantages in application. However, PSK is often used as it provides a highly bandwidth efficient modulation scheme, which is suited to the limitation bandwidth of mobile radio systems.
BPSK definitely will be chose as the modulation scheme for the system expecting reliable slow data transmission and 16QAM or 64QAM will be used in the faster but less reliable data communications.
The system having simpler coding schemes sometimes can't guarantee the reliability so it needs a CRC detection and retransmission for failed packets. This method has some shortages since the receiver will drop the whole packet even though only one bit may be in error and CRC takes up some of the available bits in the packet. While the system has complicated coding schemes will reduce the error possibility but the coding will take longer time and requiring an higher capacity for the system however not 100% guarantee that the data transmitted are all error free.
There are many problems in the wireless environment: noise, interference and the multi-path channel. In the presence of noise and interference, it is necessary to increase signal power to reduce the possibility of errors. In the multi-path channel, the received signal is made up of a sum of attenuated, phase shifted and time delayed versions of the transmitted signal by diffraction, transmission and reflections. The multi-path channels gives rise to irreducible errors from the Doppler effect of fading or inter-symbol interference. These errors are irreducible as they can not be removed by increasing signal power.
Except for convolutional coding, there is another major coding called linear block code in channel coding. Such as Cyclic code (Hamming Code), Repetition code, Parity code, Reed Solomon code, BCH code, Reed Muller code, and Perfect code .etc. Other popular codes like ARQ code (automatic repeat request) and CDMA code (code division multiple address) are all widely used in common protocols: X25, TCP/IP and so on. Convolutional codes are more used in voiceband modems (V.32, V.17, V.34) and in GSM mobile phones, as well as satellite and military communication devices. Fundamentally, convolutional codes do not offer more protection against noise than an equivalent block code. In many cases, they generally offer greater simplicity of implementation over a block code of equal power.
All the codes mentioned above can be added to the model here for simulation and compare their different performances with Viterbi convolutional code and conclude their various applications.
In the end I will list some examples of using different coding schemes.
The Internet with a typical TCP/IP stack uses a CRC-32 checksum error detection and the receiver discards frames if their checksums don't match.
In the deep space telecommunication field, NASA has used many different error correcting codes. For missions between 1969 and 1977 the Mariner spacecraft used a Reed-Muller code. Color image transmission required 3 times the amount of data, so the Golay (24,12,8) code was used. Voyager 2 went on to Uranus and Neptune and the code was switched to a concatenated Reed-Solomon code-convolutional code for its substantially more powerful error correcting capabilities.
In the satellite broadcasting (DVB) system, where is no retransmission possible, QPSK coupled with traditional Reed Solomon and Viterbi codes have been used for nearly 20 years for the delivery of digital satellite TV.
Higher order modulation schemes such as 8PSK, 16QAM and 32QAM have enabled the satellite industry to increase transponder efficiency by several orders of magnitude.