This report is concerned with providing a commentary and discussion on the failure of a major multi-million pound IS project in the public sector - that of the failure of the new British Passport Office system in 1999. Within this document I will attempt to examine and provide critique upon a number of separate issues within the scope of my findings about the project:
Her Majesty's United Kingdom Passport Agency (UKPA) is the government authority which regulates the issue and renewal of passports, as well as all other related duties, within the UK. During the summer months of 1999, the UKPA went live with their new computerised passport processing system in two of the Agency's six offices- those in Liverpool and in Newport. The system was intended to replace a legacy computer system and to provide a more efficient, and secure system. Siemens Computers were contracted for the development and provision of the new computer system and the initial processing of passport applications, working with Security Printing & Systems Ltd. who were responsible for printing and despatch of a new-style of passport with a digital image of the passport's owner (as can be found on any new passport today). The UKPA planned to roll-out the system quickly to all its offices before the busy summer season, but this was quickly put on hold due to difficulties with the new system at the Liverpool and Newport sites.
These difficulties lead to increasing delays in processing passport applications as the weeks went on. When news of the UKPA's problems was disclosed through the media in May and June, a surge in passport applications ensued. By Junes 1999, 565,000 passport applications were awaiting processing- each taking, at their peak, between 25 and 50 days to processes, compared to the Agency's target of 10. By July, the situation was critical, with several hundred people unable to travel, and phone lines being continually congested. Public and parliamentary concern rose to a fever pitch as the Home Office was forced to introduce emergency measures, including free two-year passport extensions, to ease the pressure.
By the end of August 1999, the UKPA had managed to bring the situation back under control, but not without major delays and an irreparable dent to its reputation.
Problems began before the project moved into its completion phase. Due to delays in the design and development phase, system testing did not commence until four months after the scheduled date. Throughout testing, the UKPA had access to the testing logs and records of both Siemens and Security Printing & Systems Ltd, and Agency representatives witnessed most of the tests carried out by both contractors.
For the final part of my case study on the failed Information Systems upgrade project for the UK Passport Office, I will consider how the project could have been better planned and managed to produce a successful outcome.
The UKPA's decision to use the PRINCE 2 methodology may have been a mistake- it was based more on the fact that it is the generally accepted standard within the government for project management, IT or otherwise. This project may have been better suited to another methodology but the Agency's reluctance to break away from the established way of doing things may have caused this to be a hindrance rather than a help. The Agency also opted to use an Evolutionary development model for the project which I believe hindered matters - the evolutionary model is suited best to projects where requirements are well understood from the outset - this was not the case with the UKPA- for example, it was thought early on in the development cycle that the forms submitted for reading by the digital OCR equipment would be well-written, and when real forms were used during implementation, flaws in the system were exposed when it was unable to cope with reading less perfect forms. This is an example of how the partnership between the contractor (Siemens) and client (UKPA) had a communications breakdown, with the developers failing to understand the user's requirements. The Evolutionary model is best suited to small-to-medium sized systems or parts of systems, and short-lifetime systems- neither is applicable to the UKPA's passport processing system- intended to be a large-scale (an entire nation's passport processing!) and a long-term successor to it's former PIMIS system implemented in the lat 1980's.
I believe that the Spiral model of the software development process would have been better suited to the type of Information System the UKPA was looking to develop. It allows the risks to constantly be evaluated (risks to the business of the UKPA were constantly threatening and overlooked by the project managers in the UKPA project) and for the requirement and life-cycle plan to be constantly revised and working practices and development make to fit the shifting timescale of the project evolution. This type of model would have allowed for more flexibility during the project and allowed the managers to adapt to the changing circumstances (the rise in the number of passport applications over the busy season) and the developing problems throughout the implementation of the project.
The Project Steering Committee's approach to implementation of the system using a parallel install method was, in my opinion, fundamentally sound, though poorly executed. On-site training and support was needed in order for staff to be able to get the help they needed through the implementation, and more focus on the supporting functions of the system.
In conclusion, with these approaches, more forward thinking and planning, and better liaison between the partner organisations, the UKPA's Passport Possessing Information System development could have been a success and a very different story indeed.