A modern networked economy brings with it inherent risks to the security and stability of that economy, much as any other before the advent of the Internet has. But the world of E-Enterprise presents a new and unseen threat - that of the hacker. Whether of malicious intent or otherwise, attempts to break the security of high-profile web sites and E-Businesses are rife, and it is both the duty and responsibility of an organisation to protect against them.
This essay examines the electronic threats to one of the United Kingdom's biggest electronic retailers - Amazon.co.uk - using a number of published techniques to model these threats, their potential impacts, and proposes measures for preventing them or limiting the damage they cause.
Amazon.co.uk has achieved almost unrivalled success as a purely-online retailer. The core value in Amazon's business is not the products that they sell - though these do generate a substantial revenue, but in the Marketplace (which allows users to buy and sell from each other) and, crucially, the licensing of Amazon's technical architecture and model to other organisations. It is the success of Amazon's architecture and model that has created huge value in others wishing to use it to sell their own products.
The diagram below represents a simplified view of the Amazon.co.uk system, from a networking point of view. It is this view that will be used to model the threats to Amazon's business and this view that will be built upon in each stage of this project.
Each section of this document will elaborate on the threats facing Amazon through a number of techniques.
The first step in examining the threats to the Amazon.co.uk web site is to observe and analyse its behaviour and interactions with the user - the first place a hacker or inquisitive person will look for potential holes in the interface that can be exploited.
Through usage of the Amazon.co.uk website, and a full examination of its functionality, the core components providing that functionality can be deduced. The table below lists a name for each component that is inferred, and the text below describes the behaviour of that component and its purpose in achieving a business goal.
For the purposes of this report, it is assumed that the overview analysis revealing the gateway firewall, and the encryption of personal data using the signup, login, and purchasing process identified within the components described above, present the complete picture of the security measures in Amazon.co.uk's e-commerce web site. These security measures will now be securitised and dangers to Amazon's business activities will be described, measured and quantified using the Threat Modelling Process provided by the Microsoft Corporation [1]. This is to be accomplished through a number of phases, working through the Threat Modelling Process, and tabulated below.
With the DREAD ratings determined in the previous section, each of the core threat-templates that have been described above have now been subjected to two factors of analysis to determine the risk and severity attached to each. As such, they can be re-written, as below, to incorporate the Threat ratings - and sorted to indicate the highest priority threat first, flowing down to the threat with the lowest priority.
N.B. For the sake of brevity, Attack Techniques and Countermeasures have been excluded - please see earlier Threat Description Templates.
In accordance with the overview provided by the re-ordered, rated and priorities templates of the top threat templates, it is possible to provide (i) A description of the ten most critical threats facing Amazon.co.uk's business and (ii) Countermeasures recommended to defend against these threats.
Ten of the chief threats facing Amazon.co.uk, and suggested countermeasures to those threats, are: