The role of promotion in the modern world cannot be overestimated due to the great variety of goods, consumers are faced with. Also in agriculture promotional techniques prove to play an important role through having impact on consumers' choices and causing changes in life standards of agricultural products' suppliers. It has been noticed that consumers are willing to pay more for a product of a certified quality and made with use of a special recipe and procedure. This trend of choosing high quality, original food products is being actively encouraged by the European Union by carrying out goals of the Quality Policy Poland, being member state of the EU, seeks to use of the available tools in order to communicate to the world the abundance of its traditional products of agriculture.
This essay is aimed at presenting a critical review of policy that Poland has adopted in terms of promoting its traditional products of agriculture. The objectives of this policy have been specified in a document entitled In spite of the relatively short period of operating, the instruments of this policy have already brought some positive effects, but undoubtedly more should still be done to ensure its long term success.
The strategy consists of seven objectives:
The above mentioned objectives seem to be determined in a fairly realistic but as well rather general manner which should be useful in making reasonable adjustments, when such necessity arises. Significant value of this set appears to have a fact that the authors (Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development) sought to comprise quite wide spectrum of issues related to traditionally made agricultural products. Analysing these objectives, it may be argued that the strategy's aim is not only to promote knowledge about the traditional products, encourage their bigger consumption, ensure means of legal protection of their production but it also takes into account seemingly not connected issue of national heritage.
Definition of the traditional product is nowhere to be found in the content of the strategy document (which can be considered a major drawback) but there is a reference to another crucial document - law of 17 December 2004 on registration and legal protection of designations and indications for agricultural products and foodstuffs. Such definition makes it clear what range of products and what kind of qualities entitle a producer to apply for legal protection for their produce- protection in the form of designations of origin, geographical indications and certificates of specific character.
It can be stated that establishing the Both these documents, being complementary and explanatory, fall within the framework of the EU quality policy as well as are means of achieving sustainable rural development and realising goals of second pillar of the European Union. It seems extremely important that the state itself underlines its interest in supporting producers of traditional specialities and eagerness to inform others (not only its nationals but also all members of the whole European Community) about those national treasures. Naturally, all individual initiatives of propagating such knowledge are welcome, but they usually work on a smaller scale, so without any doubt Polish authorities can and want to use their position to let this information reach more and more people. Only then can the producer be assured that other products aiming at taking benefit from the original's reputation and passing themselves off as the genuine, will be detected in order to ensure interests of both producers and consumers.
Second objective set in the Knowledge about special products manufactured in local communities did not use to go beyond given region and it is a well known fact that there is a great number of specialities in all Polish regions. Policy makers noticed lack of a widely available database gathering information about all these products. Therefore now a register has been set and published on the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development website, where identified traditional products are presented with short descriptions as well as pictures. Putting a product name on the List of Traditional Products provides it only with temporary legal protection on a national level (according to Article 35 of the law on registration and legal protection of designations and indications for agricultural products and foodstuffs). Marshal of the province (marsza Local authorities obtain an important tool in the rural development and the possibility to honour producers of renowned products (e.g. in Podlaskie voivodship there is a plan to give awards to the best such producers) That way database can be of use to the retailers looking for interesting, original options as well as directly to consumers.
Consumers are in the centre of attention in the European Union which aspires to guarantee their right to information and education about products and services. Edmund Szot argues that demand for traditional products which are usually more expensive than mass production, is not yet as big in Poland as other member states of the EU, but it should grow as Polish society becomes more affluent. Consumers are one of the target groups of informational campaign launched be the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development on 10 October 2005 under the motto: "Originality under protection". The 2 year long campaign is realised in the framework of Common Agriculture Policy mechanism "Support for promotional and informational actions on the markets of chosen agricultural products. The budget is as high as 1 481 279 Euro.
The campaign is in process now so it is too early to measure its success or failure. However it seems that optimistic forecast can be made for strong basis have been laid. Information is supposed to reach consumers to encourage them to buy products marked as regional or traditional. All the media should be used to communicate this message. Also show rooms and seminars are used to transmit the message about traditional products. However concerns are raised that Polish producers may not benefit from this campaign because products from the national List of Traditional Products do not enjoy full legal protection like the products that have already obtained status of PDO (Protected Designation of Origin), PGI (Protected Geographical Indication) and TSG (Traditional Speciality Guaranteed). None of Polish products has obtained that status yet.
That is why policymakers in Poland set the objective of preparing producers for registration of designations and names at Community level. Placing product's name on the List of Traditional Products is supposed to be just a stage and farmers, processors are encouraged to follow the European procedure. This point of the Strategy does not appear to be very successful because applications concerning only seven products have been sent to the EC (i.e. two kinds of cheese, honey, four kinds of mead) whereas on the national list there are 52 positions. Existence of two lists can be regarded as quite confusing so the farmers must be informed what advantages come with obtaining European protection for their traditional produce. One reason for their weak response may be reluctance to form groups of producers (one of the requirements in the EU procedure) or fear of passing to others secrets of traditional products' recipes (argument unfounded since the EU ensures protection of such data)
However this mistrustful and passive attitude may well be changed - thanks to opportunities of derogations from the veterinary and sanitary requirements in manufacture of traditional kinds of food, creation of which constitutes objective of Poland has been successful in reaching this objective by passing the law on registration and legal protection of designations and indications for agricultural products and foodstuffs and thus establishing system of national protection of traditionally manufactured products. Thanks to that fact producers have an opportunity to benefit form derogations under the Community law
Policy of promoting traditional products also seeks to have impact on diversification and increasing commercial activity in rural areas. This objective, although very noble and far-sighted, may be too ambitious, as problem of over-employment However it should be emphasised that creating new work places thanks to more intensive manufacture of traditional products, even if limited to small, local areas, will surely positively affect rural communities in Poland. Developing market for traditional products from various regions will influence other activities like agrotourism, which is becoming more and more popular in Polish countryside. The process has already been started by launching the informational campaign in the media, but there is long road ahead. Other European nations have been promoting national culinary heritage for a long time, boosting their national pride as well as their budgets (e.g. Italian revenues from exporting such products amount to about 1 billion Euro) So more actions should be taken to inform consumers in Poland, but also in other EU countries, about this impressive national heritage of food.
In conclusion, policy of identification and promotion of traditional products is an important step in assuring rural development in Poland and providing consumers with information and access to good quality, traditionally made products. The program, being fairly new, has already proved to be quite successful, laying down good legal basis and contributing to expansion of knowledge and interest in traditional produce. Provided it is continued (hopefully on an even grander scale) it should continue resulting in positive changes both in rural areas as well on consumers' tables. It is essential though that the producers themselves understand potential benefits the policy offers to them and actively use its tools.