The human estrogen receptor is part of the Nuclear Receptor super family. The characteristic mechanism of these intracellular receptors is to bind their ligand, forming a ligand-receptor complex, which then acts as a transcription factor altering gene expression appropriately. The estrogen receptor (ER The estrogen molecule, being small and lipophilic, is able to diffuse in to the cell and bind to the estrogen receptor. The binding of estrogen to ER (The function of the chaperone proteins is to ensure the unbound ER does not function without estrogen activation. Hsp90 is an example of a heat shock chaperone protein (1)). The ER The binding of the ER These characteristics; of ligand binding, receptor dimerisation and DNA binding are functions of the protein that are made possible through its specific structure.
The human estrogen receptor is only found in certain cells, activation of this receptor leads to the production of proteins involved in many different processes in both males and females. In women the processes include ovulation, implantation, pregnancy maintenance, childbirth and lactation, and in men the ER The activated ER
The primary structure of the ER The secondary structure consists of 1 beta sheet, 2 beta strands, 11 alpha helices, 17 beta turns, 2 gamma turns, 1 beta bulge and 1 beta hairpin. The beta sheet consists of 2 strands that run antiparallel, strand 1 runs from the 401 to the 406 position and strand 2 runs from the 408 to the 411 position. Of the 11 alpha helices, 2 are 3.10 helices and the remaining 9 are alpha helices. The number of amino acids per helix ranges from 3 (for the 3.10 helices) to 30. The 17 beta turns are all 4 amino acids in length and are either type I or IV turns. The 2 gamma turns are both 3 amino acids in length and are inverse turns. The bulge in the beta strand is of the classic type. The beta hairpin consists of 2 antiparallel beta strands, one running from amino acid 401 to 405, and the second running from amino acid 408 to 411 (5).
Figure 1 shows the overall tertiary structure of the 247 amino acid estrogen receptor monomer. It has one binding domain and the bound ligand (4-hydroxytamoxifen) is shown in green. The alpha helices are shown in the diagram in purple and the two beta strands in yellow. It is described by the CATH system as mainly alpha orthogonal bundle (6). The CATH code is 1.10.656.10, the classification [1] is mainly alpha, and is based on the secondary structure of the domain. The architecture [1.10] is orthogonal bundle and describes the overall structure of the domain determined by the orientations of the secondary structures. The topology [1.10.656] is of the Retinoid X Receptor, members of this family have similar overall shapes and connectivity of secondary structures. The homologous super family [1.10.656.10] is the Retinoid X Receptor super family, proteins in this family are believed to share a common ancestor.
Two important structures in the protein are the zinc fingers. These zinc fingers are involved in recognition of the ERE and in spatial arrangement of the dimerised receptor along the DNA. The zinc fingers each consist of a zinc atom at the centre of a tetrahedron of four cysteine residues (4). The fingers form alpha helices that combine to form a large, globular, hydrophobic domain, joined by the one beta sheet present in the protein. Each zinc finger has a specific function, the proximal finger (i.e. the one nearest the target gene) is responsible for recognition of the DNA binding site, whereas the distal finger is responsible for the correct binding of each unit of the dimer (1).
Figure 2 shows the homodimeric quarternary structure of the estrogen receptor. The estrogen receptor dimer is the biological unit that binds to the DNA to regulate gene expression. The dimerisation interface involves residues from helix H8 up to H11, (for clarity of description the 11 alpha helices of the protein are assigned an H number, H1 to H11). The most important contact surface involves the H10 helix, which binds to the other monomer through a hydrophobic leucine zipper-like interaction, and hydrophilic interactions involving direct hydrogen bonding with water molecules (7). These alpha helices, and the dimeric form of the ER
The natural ligand that binds to the estrogen receptor is 17 The domain is completely shielded from the external environment and is highly hydrophobic, it is mainly defined by 22 amino acid residues (7). The hydrophobic nature of the domain is essential for the binding of 17
Whilst 17 These synthetic anti-estrogens allow receptor dimerisation and DNA binding but the overall effect on the tissue or cell is greatly reduced when compared to the effects 17 A full anti-estrogen prevents receptor dimerisation and therefore DNA binding.
The ER Co-activators are the link between the DNA bound receptor and the general transcription factors (1). The co-activators associated with the ER
So it can be seen that the ER These features allow the receptor to bind a lipophilic ligand, recognize a specific DNA sequence, dimerise and finally to bind co-activator proteins that have the end result of altering gene expression, which is the ultimate goal of the ER