Lipids refers to the group of compounds that are sparingly soluble in water, but show a variety solubility in a number of organic solvents. Lipid content of food determined by extraction with one solvent may be quite different from the lipid content as determined with another solvent of different polarity. Fat content is determined often by soxhlet extraction method.
This experiment determination of fat in minced beef was done by using solvent extraction method, fat by acid extraction and fat content of milk by Gerber method.
Soxhlet extraction is an accepted technique for extracting fat from meat samples. Though it is simple and robust, there are drawbacks to Soxhlet extraction, such as long drying and extraction times, lack of automation, and the amount of solvent used per sample. Associated error with the method, solvent should be heated so that it boils vigorously and steadily, but the temperature of the heating medium should be as low as possible to minimize decomposition of the extracted solutes and reduce loss of solvent.
With respect to the choice of the solvent, extraction of the food material is ordinary made with either anhydrous ethyl ether or petroleum ether. Petroleum ether its advantage it is cheaper and requires no special reparation beyond possible fractionation to secure material boiling within the desired limits. Its has advantage of not being affected by traces of moisture that may be present in the material before extracted and doesn't take up moisture during extraction. It doesn't extract non fat constituents such as starch and protein. While ethyl ether it's a better solvent for fat than petroleum ether but its disadvantage it must be specifically freed from water and alcohol and kept so during determination, since moist will either dissolve the sugars and other materials which shouldn't be included in the true ether extract. Other disadvantage of soxhlet extraction its long time involved, large volumes of solvents, hazards of boiling solvents.
The Gerber method is used worldwide as a simple and rapid method for determining fat in raw and processed milks. However, the volume of the test portion used in the method has not been internationally agreed upon. Commercially fat is the most important constituent of milk, as it is the factor on which pricing of milk is made. Gerber method is based on the principle of measuring the volume of fat released from a known volume of the milk sample upon rotation/centrifugation in a specially devised and accurately calibrated modified form of glass apparatus, called butyrometer.