Canning is a method of preserving food by first heating it to a temperature that destroys contaminating micro-organisms, and then sealing it in air-tight jars or cans. Canning it relies on high temperatures to destroy micro-organisms and enzymes. Because of the danger of botulism, the only safe method of canning most foods is under conditions of both high heat and pressure, normally at temperatures of 116-121C depending on the type of food which is canned. Foods that must be pressure canned include all vegetables, meats, seafood, poultry, and dairy products. The effect of heat processing on the nutritive value of food is variable. For instance, the vitamin-C content of green vegetables is much reduced, but, owing to greater acidity, in fruit juices vitamin C is quite well retained. There is also a loss of 25 - 50% of water-soluble vitamins if the liquor is not used.
Using heat to destroy microorganisms and proper canning techniques it is important because invisible microorganisms are all around us. Many are beneficial and others are harmful. All foods contain microorganisms, the major cause of food spoilage. During the canning process, air is driven from the jar and a vacuum is formed as the jar cools and seals, preventing microorganisms from entering and recontaminate the food.
The acidity level, or pH, of foods determines whether they should be processed in a boiling water canner or pressure canner. The lower the pH, the more acidic food is. Low-acid foods, such as vegetables, meat, poultry, and fish, must be pressure canned at the recommended time and temperature to destroy Clostridium botulinum, the bacterium that causes botulism food poisoning. Canning of low-acid foods in boiling water canners is absolutely unsafe because 100 0C is not high enough to destroy C. botulinum. If botulinum bacteria survive and grow inside a sealed jar, they can produce a deadly toxin. Even a taste of food containing this toxin can be fatal. Acidic foods have pH values below 4.5. These foods include pickles, most fruits, and jams and jellies made from fruit. Acidic foods contain enough acidity either to stop the growth of botulinum bacteria or destroy the bacteria more rapidly when heated. Acidic foods may be safely canned in a boiling water canner ().
In this practical baked beans and carrots were used for the canning practical exercise. The objective was to understand the procedure involved for the processing of canned products and factors affecting the safety and quality of the products.
The recipes of the sauces were as follows
To start with the two sauces made i.e. A & B, before mixed with the beans and processed under heat treatment during exhausting and retorting, the colour and taste of the sauces were different as after the treatment. Before sauces were of bright red colour of the tomato juice and more viscous while after being mixed with beans and processed, sauces were less viscous and sauce B which was mixed with mixed spices & herbs was more brownish in colour as compared to sauce A, also the flavour and aroma of the sauces was improved. In terms of texture and softness of beans was improved after the processing.
However, the beans in two sauces A & B were not as soft as compared to the commercial product (Baked beanz Henz). This is most probable to the time the beans have been exposed to heat treatment during retorting determines the softness of the product. During the practical, baked beans were sterilized for 60 minutes, which is likely beans didn't soften enough as compared to the commercial product. Also the storage time, probable as the commercial beans were produced long time, it is possible the longer the storage time, the softer the beans becomes (mixed with sauces). While for the beans processed during the practical were tasted and compared with commercial products immediately. Also the sugar content of the commercial product was less as compared to beans in sauce B & A respectively.
Carrots were softer than normal acceptable texture. This is due to the time used to process was longer than it should have been. Most probable they were over heated during blanching and retorting. However, the brine sauce used on carrots also contributed to heat transfer inside the can and to give acceptable taste.
In canning process, food products are heated sufficiently at high temperature and for a long period of time to destroy microbial growth and enzyme activity. As a result, sterilized foods have a shelf life in excess of six month at ambient temperatures. However, severe heat treatment of in container (canning) may produce substantial changes in nutritional and sensory components of the food. This can be minimized by either reducing the time during processing or processing food before packaging i.e. aseptic packaging. In container sterilization, the length of time required to sterilize the food depends on,
Heat resistance of micro organism is temperature dependant. Clostridium botulinum is more stable heat resistant micro organism, of which 12D is needed at 121.1 0C for 3 minutes to ensure C. botulinum are destroyed. A 12 D process is used when there is likely of botulism to be present, otherwise it can result in over processing and excessive loss of quality in food. To ensure safe product rate of heat transfer through the container and into the food is important. Rate of heat transfer is influenced by the type of product, processing time & temperature, container size, filling level & temperature, agitation and venting conditions as discussed above. It is important to control all these factors affecting heat penetration and use of Good Manufacturing Practise so as to produce a safe and acceptable quality with good nutritional quality attributes.
Also it is important to establish quality assurance of the product, in terms of checking, inspecting or controlling from the raw material (sound raw material i.e. of good quality), to control filled weight, final product assessment (sensory characteristics), seam evaluation (prevention of any chances of post process contamination) as discussed above. In addition to have a target spoilage rate of < 1 in 10 4 containers. To achieve target spoilage doesn't exceed 1 in 10 4 containers, rate of heat penetration it is important to determine with the use of F value. F value for a process is the number of minutes required to kill a known population of micro organisms in a given food under specified conditions. This F value is usually set at 12 D values to give a theoretical 12 log cycle reduction of the most heat-resistant species of mesophilic spores in a can of food ().