Freezing is one of the methods used for food preservations. During freezing food is solidified or preserved through chilling and storing at temperatures below ambient temperature. Preservation of food by freezing is an excellent method of ensuring the long term retention of original characteristics of a wide variety of highly perishable food products.
Quality retention is achieved both by effect of cold temperature which slows down biochemical reactions and inhibit microbial activities, secondly lowering of water activity as most of free water is converted to ice at the temperature -18
Freezing does not completely destroy bacteria, molds, and yeasts but does retard their growth. Once food is thawed, micro organisms may continue to grow. Natural enzymes in vegetables and fruits cause flavor, colour, texture, and nutritive value changes. Freezing slows enzyme activity but does not stop it. Frozen vegetables and fruits will become tough and lose flavour during storage unless enzyme activity is stopped by blanching before freezing. Vegetables loose quality rapidly after harvesting
In order to achieve the preservation effect a high portion of the freezable water of water is converted to ice, and kept at this state during subsequent storage to minimize physical, biochemical and microbial changes which could otherwise lead to deterioration of the product. In industrial and commercial practice two temperature ranges for storage and retail sale are used, namely frozen foods and deep frozen foods. Frozen foods is used for a limited group of food products which are maintain at temperature -10
In this practical, potatoes, sprouts, apples, mushrooms, carrots and tomatoes were used to study freezing processing. Fruits and vegetables were prepared by blanching to inactivate enzymes and partially cooked and remove air and vegetative organisms. During blanching they were treated at different time interval to study blanching effects. Also sulphiting was done for samples which were not blanched in order to study/ control browning effect.
+ Indicates positive test for browning, where by samples were sliced and chopped into halves. Firstly hydrogen peroxide was applied followed by Guiacol (phenolic compound).
When few drops of hydrogen peroxide was applied it did effervesce which indicated the presence of catalase enzymes, and when few drops of guiacol was added formed browning due to presence of free radicals formed by catalase enzymes.
From the table above carrots, potatoes and sprouts which were not blanched undergone browning rapidly as compared to others samples which were blanched. Also when blanching was done by use hard water, browning occurred in short time as compared to soft water. Carrots undergo browning when were left on air for some period of time especially at the sides of the sliced pieces. However, catalase enzyme produced in fruits and vegetables is variable depending on the type of variety of the product, size, growing conditions and maturity stage of the product.
The main effect of freezing on food quality is the damage caused to cell by ice crystal growth. Freezing causes negligible changes to tissues, flavour and nutritional components. As there are several methods of freezing techniques which can be applied to food products but they do differ on energy consumption, desirable and undesirable effects they do bring about in food products.
Example vacuum freezing is often used as a preliminary step for freezing drying, plate freezing is mostly applicable to food products which can be placed in plates during freezing although it is time consuming during loading and offloading. Blast freezing are flexible i.e. can be used to freeze any time of food products but moisture from the food is transferred to the air and builds up as ice on the refrigeration coils, on which with time it needs to be removed by defrosting of which it can be un economical and wastage of time in large scale industries. Liquid nitrogen is expensive and mostly reserved for expensive products and the products that can be frozen in less than 1 minute. As the size of foods increase, conduction within the food becomes the limiting resistance.