This practical investigates the bonding of several substituted derivatives of molybdenum hexacarbonyl.. The complexes are first synthesized, and the bonding characterized by obtaining Infrared spectra and
The carbonyl moiety associates to the central metal species via the carbon atom of the group. The electronic structure of the carbonyl group is such that there are two ways for the bonding can occur. The first, weaker strategy is through a
The second, significantly stronger strategy is through 'back-donation' from an occupied d
Despite the synergic nature of these two bonding strategies, the Since this interaction utilizes the CO This causes a reduction in the carbon-oxygen bonding strength and increases the bond length, which in-turn results in a less energetic vibration, and a thus a lower Hence, the
The allyl anion has two extreme resonance structures, but spectroscopic evidence as quoted by Hull and Stiddard, 1967 suggests that there is no C=C double bond present at any time, since In addition, Thus is implied the presence of the resonance stabilized delocalized structure of the allyl anion in the coordination complex.
The type of bonding present to the central metal species is the side-on overlap of the This overlap strategy is referred to as
By inspecting the molecular orbital energy diagram for the allyl anion, it can be seen that there are two occupied MO's and one vacant.
The orientation of the occupied bonding and non-bonding orbitals, being co-parallel would result in a
However, the anti-bonding orbitals being fully out of phase, are anti-parallel with one-another. This would allow a As with the case of the carbonyl association, the back-donation would lower the C-C bond order and increase the bond length, this would lead to a less energetic C-C vibration, ie.,
The This follows the decrease in energy of the CO stretch vibration due to the decrease in bond order, bond length and bond strength.
According to Nakamoto, 1986 most carbonyl compounds 'exhibit a strong a sharp band at ca. 2100-1800cm
The complex From the character table it can be found that there is only one IR active vibrational mode, T Nakamoto, 1986 gives the vibrational wavenumber,
The complex
From the character table, it can be seen that only the three vibrations, A Stiddard, 1962 quotes there to be four IR active C-O stretching modes, Orgel, 1962 suggests a pair of bands, closely separated. This could perhaps be due to the different environments the four carbonyl's are found in - two equatorial to the bipyridyl and two axial. The average of the two is quoted as 1908cm 100-120cm
The product complex,
Hull and Stiddard, 1967 quote there to be two
The general trend going from molybdenum (0) hexacarbonyl to molybdenum (0) tetracarbonyl and to molybdenum (II) bicarbonyl is a decreasing wavenumber for the This represents the weakening of the carbon-oxygen bond, and could be caused by an increasing degree of Also, an increasing pull of electron density from the carbonyl group onto the metal at higher oxidation states. The number of bands observed can be explained in terms of modes of vibrations using group theory.
Nakamoto, 1986 quotes a peak for There is certainly a peak 'near' 2050cm Next to be considered is the There is a peak at 825cm Finally, a sharp More evidence is required.
If we now turn our attention to Hull and Stiddard, 1967, a weak peak is quoted at wavenumber 825cm In combination, these are good indications the metal is associated to the thiocyanate via the Nitrogen terminus. On my acquired spectrum for the dicarbonyl bipyridyl The 2090.6cm However, the total absence of a
Transitions that occur 'fast' on the NMR timescale cannot be distinguished source from destination, only fairly slow transition give rise to strong crisp peaks. Proton exchange between heteroatoms is a very fast process which gives blurred lines in the spectra - this is probably not happening in this complex as peaks are all sharp. This is because the individual resonance peaks can be isolated from one another.
Interpretation of the 2,2-bipyridyl spectrum.
Eight protons are present in 2,2-bipyridine, four on each ring system. Nitrogen is an electronegative element and deshields neighbouring protons to the NMR field, thus the peaks for greatest chemical shift are to be found for photons on atom The two rings posses delocailsed This 'flow' causes protons coplanar to the ring to be exposed to an enhanced region of the magnetic field induced and are thus deshielded significantly. This extra downfield shift due to the ring current causes C-H proton resonsants between 8 and 9 (a region usually associated with aldehydes). Around the ring, those protons most intimately associated with the nitrogen has most downfield chemical shifts, ie., in order of decreasing shift. a, b, c and b. With the largest chemical shift, the proton alpha to the Nitrogen, which resembles an aldehyde in environments - an sp When bonded to the metal centre in the complex, electron density from the bipy nitrogen is lost. This would cause the nitrogen to be more electron deficient and thus have a stronger pull on electrons in the 2,2-bypyridine rings, hence causing an even greater
Nearby hydrogens can couple spins with other protons in NMR so multiple peaks are often apparent for a single proton due to coupling with neighbors. The coupling between protons adjascent on the heterocycle backbone cause the splitting pattern observed.
All the different possible structures of the bonded allyl species, only one for the triphaptic bonding strategy results in only two environments with the splitting pattern observed. The two terminal proton environments are identical and both differ from the 2-carbon.
The NMR data presented by Hull and Stiddard, 1967 conclusively proves the trihaptic nature of the bonding and the delocalized nature of the The X-Ray evidence provided by Graham and Fenn, 1969 shows the central allyl carbonan to by closed to the metal centre. This certainly disproves any terminal allyl sigma association. It also does away with the dihaptic possibility, s0ince on grounds the steric bulk of the methyl group approaching the metal centre, the free allyl end would be pushed away. Again, the only plausible structure, supported by both NMR (section C above), X-Ray and IR is trihaptic bonding.
Molybdenum being in group 6 has the valence configuration 5s There are 6 carbonyl ligands, each bonded to the central metal contributing 2 electrons each per bond, giving 12 electrons. This added to the 4d
The complex Tetracarbonyl bipy Mo(0), two of the carbonyl ligands (2 electron donors) are replaced by the bidentate 2,2-bipyridyl ligands which donates a total of four electrons. Thus this also has 18 electrons.
The product complex is more difficult. If the molybdenum where assigned the oxidation state of (II), it would possess the configuration of 4d There are 2 carbonyl ligands (4 electrons), one bidentate 2,2-bipyridyl (4 electrons) and one thiocyanato ligand (2 electrons). This is 14 electrons. The allyl anion bonds trihaptically and so contributes 3 electrons. This gives 17 electrons and is not correct. An alternative approach is to assign an oxidation state of (0) to the metal centre. In the complex, it is convenient to consider the ligands as neutral and then to begin counting electrons. For reasons of energetics it is most favourable for the ground state of Molybdenum to have only unpaired electrons so the electron spins can be parallel - this gives rise to the configuration 5s So now, with 5 electron on the metal species, 4 from 2 carbonyls, 4 from the 2,2-bipyridyl, 2 from the thiocyanate and 3 from the
Hence, all three species conform to the 18 electron rule.