The principal contribution of micro morphology analyses are that it enables simultaneous new high-resolution analysis of the microscopic properties of individual sediments and artefactual and bioarchaeological remains, within precise depositional and post depositional contexts in occupation deposits. These are one of the critical sources of gaining sociocultural and environmental information, and becoming an integral part of the excavation process. (Matthews.2005: 355-356)
Furthermore the samples examined will enable study of the use of space in early agricultural and urban sites including atalhyk in Turkey around 7400-6200BC. atalhyk is known as one of the largest and most complex of sociocultural Neolithic settlements. The sample deposits, which applied to this report, mainly include palaeoecological sequences and landscapes, architectural materials, plant remains and dung, sequences of floors and deposits and ritual contexts(Renfrew and Bahn 2000:236).
These micro-stratigraphic sequences and micro-residues in accumulated occupation deposits contribute to identify the trace of routine practices, microenvironment and aspects of material culture as well as exceptional events and changes through time and across space form its foundation to closure. In short, information of the complex spatial organisation and chronological cycles of domestic, ritual and economic activities within building are explored by archaeologist at the micro scale. (Matthews.2005:355-356)
Thus, this report mainly includes the basic outline of research questions, micro-morphological methodology employed in sample collection, and thin section preparation.
Neolithic sites in the ancient Near East often represent planning within individual buildings and settlements. In Neolithic Near East, planning is often represented. This evidence largely suggests that there are powerful organisations for sharing and maintaining sociocultural conventions. Moreover, the traces of ritual features are identified from this micro morphological sample. This suggests that ritual is playing a significant role in both private and wider sociocultural cohesion in Ancient Near East. In 1999, to investigate preservation of organic and inorganic remains at the base of the mound, the research project was started. The main research aim of atalhyk research project is to place the complex architecture and symbolism within its sociocultural and palaeoecological context, as well as investigating its nature of deposit, as well as origins and development.
However, one of the critical considerations in this aim is to establish the spatio-temporal and contextual relationships between the paintings and other features, as well as artefactual and bioarchaeological remains within the settlement and landscape. (Matthews.2005:355-356)
Generally, building 17 is known as complex micro stratigraphic sequences due to the various reasons. For example, changing concept of space, such as moving bin from southwest to north east. Although there are complexities, building 17 has variety of significant architecture remains, as hearths, floor surfaces, biological remains, and micro residues, as well as evidence of shrine 10. (Matthews 1999 )
The sequence of wall plaster is from the south-eastern corner above hearths. Mostly the origin of this archaeological sediment is made of un-burnt white plasters, which comprised wall within the building 17(Matthews.2005:367), and red ochre is used for paintings, which is considered as evidence of ritual activities. Ritual feature has were always considered as higher, cleaner, although rarely on south wall. (Matthews.2006: 553)
All of the 51 plasters and washes in this sequence are coated in soot, except significantly the last plaster was perhaps related to ritual closure of the building. Many of these plasters have similar modal thickness, 200-400 um. (Matthews.2005:367)
Map 1 represents the location of this sequence.
This white plaster sequence include charred plants, shells, minerals (mica, quartz), bone, and lumps
The technique of micro-morphology has been developed by the study of soil science, and has been improving internationally by standardized descriptive methodology.(Matthews.2005:356-357)
The result from micro-morphological analysis can apply to examine and explore the trends in the principal depositional components and deposit-types, including material types and surfaces, plant remains and dung and occupation deposits for all thin section samples.( Matthews.2005:356-357)
Interpretation of material types, surfaces and textures would contribute to providing some answers to questions: the source location, the meanings of materials, major life cycles of building and particular events, as well as how these sediments are transformed into architectural material, because many plasters and mud bricks include well preserved impressions and siliceous remains of plants that would have served as stabilisers and provided added tensile strength and flexibility. (Matthews.2005:364 ):
Although various remains have been identified through the micromorphological analysis by microscope, the particularity of the remains is still left. For example the details of charred plant remain. It would be improved with the increase of the ability of microscope and the future research about micromorphological study.