When looking to compare the representation of war in and There are a number of concordant themes portraying war as a horrific and futile experience within both oeuvres and the purpose of this essay is to examine and compare the representations of these wartime representations thematically.
The paramount theme in both the novel and the film is that of futility and B The representations of futility can be split into various groups. One example is the whole war itself being completely futile; this is seen in the very beginning of as B This is significant as it is a man who is high up in command in the German Army, and ergo one who should evoke confidence and enthusiasm and inspire a will for success in his soldiers, appears apathetic and resigned. In fact: " At the start also, B The view that the entire war itself is pointless concurs with the theory of Charlotte W. Ghurye, who states that at this point in history, all German efforts are futile and B This is a myth yet "life goes on...in the hospital... in the school... and at the inn...in a self-assured manner as if the Germans were still victors." This pointlessness of war is present in The point, therefore, is mirrored in the film but it is portrayed differently as there is the acceptance in the film that victory is already lost, yet B War is portrayed by B
In both There is a great sense of needless, human sacrifice which ties into the representation of war; for example in Bressen is sent back to the front even though he is unfit to fight. His injury is dismissed as "  The Officer who speaks to inspire the soldiers sounds more than a little pessimistic when he gives the soldiers only the option of " The bridge itself serves no strategic purpose and is in fact to be blown up. They are fighting not only a lost but also a pointless battle. Wicki uses the boys' enthusiasm for war as a tool to help emphasise how much of a needless death it is, as, should the boys have not appeared so keen to go to war in front of their teacher, he probably wouldn't have spoken with the Officer in the way in which he did. B - Wicki makes us think, until the confrontation with the enemy that the boys will be successfully spared.
The theme of futility extends also to the realisation that most of the deaths are caused by logistical mistakes. For example, the removal of the dud that kills Scneider in had been ordered several times and, after the explosion, the Russians begin firing for a long time, however, " These examples both show how simple, but more importantly, needless mistakes (often by those in command) lead to unnecessary death.  The representations differ between the book and the film as B Wicki's effect is perhaps a little more dramatic in the sense that it is immediate. This can be put down to the fact that, as a director, Wicki, does not have the luxury of allowing his viewer time to contemplate, as B It is therefore necessary to keep the viewer shocked and interested. Any deep thought and consideration must come afterwards.
B that war is futile in that no matter who one is, the fate of death cannot be avoided. There is certainly the feeling in that a Jew dies in the concentration camps, and a German on the battle field. B C.W. Ghurye states; "What constitutes the utter absurdity is the fact that he (Feinhals) is killed when the war is practically over, seconds before he is reunited with his parents" Wicki uses the dramatic tool of the vision of the young boys' death to convey his point of everybody being killed and at the end and this point links in with the representation of the horror of war - "Einzig Mutz bleibt, verlassen und verzweifelt, am Leben." B
The portrayal of relationships in wartime differs between the two mediums, however, both B In In it is different as the main relationship is between Ilona and Feinhals, although they have both expressed their love for each other they know they cannot be together: Frau Susan also thinks of her husband but this is useless, as she has no idea where he is. Maria is made pregnant by Peter and, under normal circumstances, they could perhaps be together but this is made impossible by the war again as Peter is moved on shortly after. Both the director and the author, therefore portray relationships as futile during the war.
Another main theme in both This can happen sexually in the cases of Bressen - and Barbara and Karl's father in The boys in This is a powerful image for the viewer who is shocked at the sight of such enthusiasm for war. They cannot wait to see the bridge where a bomb was rumoured to have dropped, and casually joke about the school being bombed - "Ich werde Churchill meinen Stundenplan schicken." Following this, when in the classroom, the boys discuss the war tactics they would pursue should they be in charge. This image is mirrored in Wo warst du, Adam? where Feinhals calls to Ilona: "wir spielen Generalstab, ein wunderbares Spiel" Even after the boys are called up and positioned at the bridge Wicki still portrays them as thinking that it is not quite real - it has not sunk in to them that they are involved in a real war. They show their immaturity when wanting to shoot cans on the bridge. One boy asks their Sergeant if he could be stationed in an observation post similar to one that he held when the boys used to play children's games on that very bridge. This denial extends even after they face the enemy and they show great delight at successfully shooting them. These attitudes continue all the way up arguably until Karl dies. B Another example is found in the form of Greck who yearns for a go on the "Schiffschaukel" Both B One representation specific to B Alan Bance agrees. Bressen is one character to use as an example for this. When he sees the picture of the shepherd he remembers "da
Given the fact that both pieces of work portray a horrific situation (the Second World War) one would expect to find reference to the horror and the inhumanity of war. Indeed the examples of this are many. Both B these deaths are numerous and the human loss, particularly as affects Frau Susan, is devastating. Perhaps the most horrific death is that of Ilona who is shot by Filkskeit, a man who has spared other Jews and was thought not to be able to kill. C.W Churye puts this down to envy as Ilona possess both what he desires most ("beauty, stature, religious faith, and a perfect voice" Alan Bance says that "it goes without saying that war is evil" The inhumane aspect in the book comes arguably in the form of Filkskeit's selection basis for who should be killed and who should not,
This inhumanity of war is represented somewhat differently in Owing to their ridiculous enthusiasm the viewer is provoked into wondering why the boys hold such attitudes. Although this contemplation would perhaps come after the film, Wicki makes us think of the extent of the indoctrinated evil (probably, in this case, of the Hitler Youth or, ironically, the same English teacher who tried to persuade the Captain to spare their lives) for the boys to have such enthusiasm for war. When they hear that they will be called up Even when two of them have already died and they are given the chance to surrender by the Americans they do not give up. This, however, is not a direct link towards Nazism and as Peter Zander explains: This is a different representation to Wo warst du, Adam? as people address and leave each other with the exclamation "Heil Hitler!" and there is a felling in the book of people upholding and staying loyal to the Nazi criteria for how one should behave. Greck is one such example, as well as worrying whether he has given the correct Nazi salute or not, he is also concerned after having sold his trousers to a Jew.
Both oeuvres portray the role of women in wartime in much the same way, that is to say perfectly fitting with the In Wo warst du, Adam? this is done primarily through the representation of Frau Susan who cooks and looks after the soldiers staying with her and worries about her husband. In the film the boys' mothers worry that their sons are going off to war at such a young age. These representations are similar in that the role of women is very limited and it is the men who make all the decisions and go to fight in the war - both mediums focus on them.
It is undoubtedly the case that both B However, to ensure a balanced account is given, it is important to state that sometimes, in both cases, war is portrayed somewhat paradoxically; and is seen not to be a terrible experience, in rare circumstances. For example in when stationed at Frau Susan's house, there is a relaxed atmosphere and wartime life could almost be pleasant or at lest mirror that of the everyday: The Hungarian civilians are eating, amusing themselves, and transacting business without concern for war." B Die Soldaten schienen viel Geld und sehr viel Zeit zu haben." Although this is not directly the case in Die Br
One major difference between the representations of war in from that in B Religion is used to illustrate the ignorance of Bressen who had no idea there were Catholics in Romania and to make the point that the Nazi claim of Although both are major themes to do with the Second World War, no reference is made to them in Similarly, there is no depiction of the enemy in - we see them at the end of B This futility is mentioned by C.W. Ghurye who describes "the battles raging some 50 miles away, futile in themselves" An ironic twist, highlighted by Ghurye is that Schniewind "shoots at his own people (Feinhals), but does not fire a single cannon at the enemy"
The representation of war between these two mediums differs mainly as, in B
In conclusion, Heinrich B and Bernhard Wicki's The representation of these themes is often similar, yet one must consider that they are not always trying to make the same point. In some instances, therefore, the tools they use to control us as a reader or as a viewer are different.