As a writer of short stories the author's main objective is to keep the reader interested and to avoid any opportunities for tangent thoughts relating to themes or issues arising from the story. Therefore, the effects of his composition are always in the forefront of M The 'nouvelle' is supposed to be read all in one go and M
The first reminder we see in both 'Mateo Falcone' and 'Tamango' of M The stories are based on a few key events that only take place over a matter of hours or days. The use of a narrator is an important element in M This is significant as one of the dangers of a short story is that the reader gets too concerned with characteristics and his attention can be diverted from the narrative. Ergo, M One example of this is the killing of Fortunato Instead M Je (Mateo Falcone) vais l'enterrer. Il est mort en Chr Another technique used by M
Another aid to control the reader is found in M Le cadran La tentation Here, M This is a technique of M M The opposite effect is used also by M M L'un s'efforce de retenir son arme, l'autre de l'arracher. Dans cette lutte furieuse, ils tombent tous les deux" This, again, speeds up the reader at a dramatic point in the narrative and makes the tale more immediate and exciting.
Vivid, yet concise description is used to control the reader. This allows M Enfin, peu
M He does this by making it very difficult to anticipate what is coming next in the narrative. There are a number of twists in the story designed to shock the reader; for example, although entitled 'Mateo Falcone' there is actually very little reference to this man at all in the story. When we do see him he is perhaps somewhat different to what the reader may have expected; it is surprising that a man who holds the virtue of loyalty so dear, would kill his own son. Indeed the whole relationship between father and son is surprising as a close father-son bond would perhaps have been anticipated, especially as the son and heir is so proud of his dad. The fact that Mateo Falcone himself, a crook and a cold-blooded killer, has any sort of moral code is unexpected, let alone any religious beliefs to the extent of making Fortunato pray before being shot. Mateo Falcone, throughout the opening of the story is built up as a hero and to shoot his own son in cold blood comes as a shock. In 'Tamango' a similar technique is used to achieve the same effect; it is surprising that Tamango is rescued by the very slaves he had betrayed, and the ease in which he was captured before hand was an anti-climax. Again, at the end, we see a twist in that "il mourut this is certainly not gratifying for the reader but does control him - ensuring kept concentration and no time for reflex ion on previous points.
However, having said that M Thanks to the dramatic twists, vivid descriptions, objectivity and changes of pace in the narrative, the reader does not have time to think about issues arising from the story, characteristics, or to make a moral judgement. M M Fortunato's name is one such irony, as is the name of the ship (l'esperence) and Ledoux in 'Tamango'. At the very end of 'Mateo Falcone' we see that Fortunato is to be replaced by "Tiodoro Bianchi" Two things that Mateo Falcone stands against.
Therefore, it is clear, after analysing the various techniques used by M He does above all attempt to control the reader to make the story more effective. Although not always gratifying during the narrative, M