When attempting to compare the representation of the press in Heinrich B It is true to say that both the novel The pieces differ, however, as the reasons for these pessimistic representations mirror contradicting social themes of the times the books were written. It is incidentally, somewhat ironic that the very 'ideal' of the press being free is what is, on the one hand the problem in
B G The piece highlights the ability and willingness of the press to exploit the German Federal Republic population and benefit from people's readiness to see and believe evil in others.
The press, represented through the newspaper ' One example of this in He is desperate to get a story; will hound primary school teachers and his counterparts are shown to travel to disturb a doctor in the mountains merely to ask him about the character of their target; T At this point in the narrative another immoral characteristic of the press is also displayed - T
The representations of the press in One example, however, of morality in and her determination to write the truth about it, instead of an inaccurate version which would survive censorship and be printed. Early on in the novel Josefa is portrayed as a radical character and one who is uncomfortable with the government's ability to muzzle the press and suppress the truth about the extent of environmental degradation, ' Josefa is determined and succeeds in writing the truth about the atrocities of the town of B. the description she gives it emphasises her determination: 'Und diese D Bitte gehen Sie geradeaus bis zum Ammoniak, dann links bis zur Salpeters Wenn Sie einen stechenden Schmerz in Hals und Bronchien versp Her character is one of moral justice and this is what enables her to rebel against the 'norm' she is expected and almost forced to follow. These points illustrate that although the press is heavily censored and prevents the publication of many writers in the German Democratic Republic, it does not succeed in all cases of extinguishing radical ideas.
The complete fabrication in some instances of the testaments of witnesses or character referees in Simple inaccuracies such as the ' Doris Auerbach likens the These can be found when T This representation of the press becomes even more negative when the reporter tries to defend himself: 'da An interesting scene in the film Die verlorene Ehre der Katharina Blum is the one at the very end; that of T The image of the camera and the reporter moving along the line of attendants, commentating on the events is a powerful one. This shows that the press is willing to impose itself on the intimacy of a funeral to get a story. Another conceivable angle would be that this image reflects the life of T
It was the case in the German Democratic Republic that, due to the censorship of the press by the state, one would not be allowed, as in the case of Josefa, to write a piece which did not fit in with a praise of the communist regime. A '
Maron describes Josefa as someone who becomes increasingly more resigned as the story continues. She goes mad and becomes a pariah even before she has started to write the piece on She wrestles with her conscience and it is the mere decision to do something that is morally right which she is made to feel uncomfortable for. She thinks that ' ' The fact that people especially the employee at the factory see her as na She becomes nervous and agitated and when she meets with the publisher cannot rest and is extremely uneasy: ' Mein Mund war trocken und brannte... Mir wurde hei ' ' At the end, although her article is to be printed, the press has destroyed her ability to live as a GDR citizen; she leaves by taxi and it is implied that she will either go to commit suicide or defect, which is, in the eyes of her, practically the same thing.
Unlike the censored press in the GDR which was controlled by the state, the Federal German Republic's equivalent ' Indeed the aim of the press in the FGR was to be so that '
In the case of Katharina Blum we see an innocent and pure female be seduced by a man and destroyed a relentless society. The name Katharina is from the Greek word Katharos, (K Many believe that Blum could represent beauty or could link her to Catherine of Siena. Katharina Blum is 'victimised by the reporter, a writer for a publication very much like the 'Bild-Zeitung'' B We hear the testaments of Katharina's friends and employers but then see her turn into a passive and vengeful figure. The press exaggerates the facts and paints a very negative but, more importantly, unfair picture of Katharina. They try ' ' Katharina Blum is sick after seeing a headline and B She receives hate mail and violently smashes up her apartment in anger.
Whereas Katharina used to be liked by all her friends in the bar where she often goes, when she appears there since appearing in the ' 'Katharina loses her respect and position in society through these articles' G These two simple yet hard-hitting sentences sum up Katharina's present, horrific situation. She has lost everything. The fact that the press has actually undoubtedly caused at least some of this trauma for her, coupled with the remarks as she walks through the bar, leave her completely destroyed and without reason to such a point that she senses it logical and the only response to murder T Her only direction is towards G '
Therefore, B Her transformation from a nice, well-liked stable member of society to a murderer without remorse runs parallel to her appearances in the One can have no doubt that these atrocities inflicted upon her directly result in her dramatic downfall. As a reader, we become even more disturbed realising that all this said scandal is in fact something that should be, to any reasonable person, merely part of the Here B This is a negative depiction of the press as, in this instance; it is a media tool that is geared towards provoking this knee-jerk response. Furthermore, the drama is intensified merely to enhance the sale of newspapers and no concern goes to the individual, who is left completely destroyed.
Both central characters, therefore, in However, the type of destruction and the reasons for it differ.
One other independent pessimistic representation of the press in Unlike the ideal of having these two powerful and beneficial forces aiding each other in the field of crime - as is the intended case in most societies - B
The representation of the press as a negative presence in both In Christian is one such example: '  '
The texts differ in their representation of the media in that; whilst B In This, however, is not the case in Another example of a little victory for Josefa is that the '
The representations of the press in In In It is more than a little ironic that Katharina Blum longs for the very thing which drives Josefa to destruction. In this way B This suggests that, for the media to be a successful tool of public information, a sensible medium must be found. After studying
In conclusion it is clear that there are many similarities between the representation of the press in Heinrich B They both narrate a frustrated, yet strong-willed central character who is, in spite of this determination, overcome by the powers of the press and left completely resigned and destroyed. In the case of They differ, however, in that although it is the press entirely put to blame in