The effects of tillage in autumn on the rate of litter decomposition over winter and on soil invertebrate diversity and abundance in the following spring were investigated. The experiment was carried out from October 2005 to February 2006 in Sonning farm at the University of Reading, U.K. There was a total of 12 blocks with tilled and control plots in each block, a set of litter in mesh bags; one on the soil surface and the other buried at 15 cm in depth, was set up in each plot. The soil was sampled from each plot in spring from which invertebrate diversity (the number of organisms and species abundance) was investigated. % loss of litter weight was analysed, there was no significant correlation with control and tilled treatments or with surface and buried treatments. The identified invertebrates were too small in number to carry out statistical analysis. There suggested various biases in the experiment such as low temperature over winter which reduced the activities of soil fauna, the size of blocks, the long-term land management prior to the experiment, and the duration of study, all of which were probably not effective to differentiate the soil community structure. The results pointed out the complexity and the inconsistent responses of soil ecosystem under agriculture which pose difficulty in examining the functioning of soil food web.
Soil ecosystem in relation to interaction between soil organisms and physical, chemical properties of soil and flora is important in regulating above-ground ecosystem, yet its function is not well understood. Soil invertebrates are comprised of microfauna (e.g. protozoa, fungi, viruses), mesofauna (e.g. Collembola, mites), and macrofauna (e.g. earthworms, beetles, invertebrate larvae). Those numerous organisms form a complex food web. Species composition at a particular depth is determined by soil physical structure (e.g. temperature, aeration, porosity, water content), and by the availability of food resources such as litter, roots and fauna (Adl, 2003. Coleman & Crossley, 2003). Many macrofauna species contribute to decomposition of litter through initial fragmentation and comminution of materials. Macroarthropods, earthworms, onychophorans, and gastropods feed on litter and their chewing activities make it break down into small fragments (Adl, 2003). Initial decomposition is stimulated by the salivary secretions and excretion of digested litter. Saprotrophs colonise those materials and proceed to further decomposition process. In addition, predation of a soil organism by another has significant effects on litter decomposition. For instance, mites feed on bacteriophagus nematodes and regulate the decomposition rate by keeping the balance of species abundance and decomposition process (Killham, 1994).
Agroecosystem can alter the functional performance of this complex food web. Tillage, crop selection and rotation, pest management are the major anthropogenic inputs in agricultural practice (Edwards & Bohlen, 1996). In terms of the effects of tillage on soil community, Wardle et al (1995) suggested three principal factors which modify the soil food web structure; 1. soil physical disruption, 2. residue distribution, and 3. weed density, from the comparative study of the responses of soil organisms under different management of no-tillage and conventional tillage. According to this review, large soil organisms are vulnerable to physical disruption due to their body sizes, while small organisms are less affected or sometimes stimulated. Under no-tillage system, plant residue is accumulated at soil surface which host many soil organisms, thus this upper soil profile become the most important regulator of the soil community. Burial of litter by cultivation leads to the accretion of food resources below ground and changes soil physical properties such as temperature, moisture content, and aeration, stimulating particular micro- and meso-fauna species at ploughed depth, and the decomposition rate is likely to be increased. Above-ground plant community structure, particularly the presence of symbiotic nitrogen-fixing legume species, and associating changes in microclimate is important in providing a certain physical and chemical environmental condition for soil organisms.
In the U.K, it is suggested that changes in agriculture practice, for example, changes in crop species and the accompanied change in the timing of tillage have caused disturbance in soil ecosystem, resulting in the decline of larger animals primarily bird species, the diet of which is heavily dependent upon soil biota (van Emden & Rothschild, 2004). Introduced new crop species, use of pesticides and inorganic fertilizers, land intensification, and use of machinery may have been the major factors for the modification of soil ecosystem. In addition, although the extent of study outcomes are not yet satisfactory to confirm this correlation, tillage in autumn, removal of litter over winter have probably diminished the abundance and activities of soil organism, hence available food resources for birds (Coleman & Crossley, 2003. Killham, 1994).
The aim of this experiment was to examine the effects of autumn tillage on plant litter decomposition rate and the structure of soil ecosystem based on three hypotheses;
1. Autumn tillage has no effect on soil invertebrate diversity and abundance in the following spring.
2. Buried plant litter decomposes at the same rate as plant litter on the soil surface.
3. Autumn soil tillage does not affect the rate of plant litter decomposition.
There was no statistically significant outcome which supported the correlation between soil invertebrate diversity, the rate of decomposition, and the tillage treatment in autumn. This study probably had a major problem in biases in the experimental design to obtain sufficient amount of responses from soil ecosystem, there are many possible improvements as suggested. There are increasing numbers of studies which would be referred to estimate the likely effects of autumn tillage on agroecosystems. In general, although not consistent in many cases, there seemed to have some negative effects of tillage operation on soil ecosystem in terms of disturbance, leading to the modification in the community structure. The question is still not well answered and research is under development.
In conclusion, this study highlighted the difficulty of investigating the functioning of soil ecosystem under agricultural practice due to its complexity and inconsistent responses for anthropogenic disturbance. Further research is expected to apply this outcome.