Fairly dry sunny, 20 % cloud, very low water table compared with average at this time of year which was because of the prolonged winter. Survey was carried out only from the right side bank.
The small stream of River Pang flows through Bradfield village, about seven miles west of Reading. It is a chalk stream on the plain valley. The survey section of 0.5 km runs to the central part of the village, flowing to the mill. The river has been managed for drainage purpose and the flow has been straightened to direct to the mill. Except for a couple of faggots set up in the stream, there is litter rapid or debris dam. Mainly due to the presence of weir, high vegetation coverage, flat topography, the narrow width of the river and the late coming of spring of the surveyed year, water flow was calm and slow. It was estimated that sedimentation process would occur at rather fast rate, leading to encourage the colonization of terrestrial vegetation at the bank side unless the water table rises with the change of season, i.e. the coming of summer. There are two foot paths which start from the bridge along the either side of the stream, approximately 50 cm to 1 m away from the bank. The adjacent land was high on the right, approximately 2 m higher than the left land, hence two concrete outpours are built on the right bank as drainage channels. There was a ditch perpendicular to the flow direction of the stream on the left bank from which the flow feeds the grazing land. While the slope of the left bank is relatively constantly flat, that of the right bank is steep for the lower half of the section surveyed, but it levels down as the footpath widens towards the bridge.
The predominant feature of the river bed is gravel (about 60%), and alluvial silt (about 40%).
The surveyed section is 500 meters long. Water depth probably does not exceed 1 meter at maximum which was measured in the cross section G-H, and it becomes shallower along its length, 40 cm in the cross section A-B, nearby the bridge. Channel width gradually widens towards the bridge. 8 m at the start point (cross section G-H) to 20 m at the largest (cross section A-B) from where it begins to be firmly controlled with sandbags piled up at both banks as the river reaches the mill.
Vertical or sloping earth cliffs on the both banks, largely covered with vegetation; mainly sedge, reeds in the close proximity to water and various grass species at higher level. There are a few large trees on the banks which over hanging the river. The height of the banks ranges from 30 cm to about 1 m on the right, more constantly about 50 cm on the left. The top of the banks is flattened towards the foot paths, then land rises up to 2 m as a steep slope on the right while it lowers down gradually on the left to agricultural land. About 40 m in the length of the right bank on the bottom of the section was fenced off where most of the trees were young and the slope of the bank was very steep.
None recorded.
Primary due to the low water flow, marginal vegetation has started to spread to be mixed with channel vegetation in some areas. The majority of the marginal vegetation was covered with High channel vegetation coverage of approximately 60% on average, mainly comprised of some colonies of
Walking on the public footh paths along the either side of the stream. There is a wooden bench at about 150 m away from the starting point of the survey section.
Wildlife identification was taken place only on the invertebrate species in the stream at each cross section. A handful of river bed load was sampled from the middle point of the stream in each section by a minute kick sampling method with a net.
Insects: Fresh water shrimp, snail, beetle larvae, mayfly larvae
Grazing land would provide a suitable habitat for many invertebrate species. There was a very large old tree trunk of about 1 m in diameter and 2 m in length left on the slope on the right which would be ideal for invertebrates.
A couple of faggots in the stream. Some large trees appeared to be recorded and most of the trees have been managed to allow the adequate amount of sunlight penetration to the stream.
Careful management of faggots may be required in the long term to prevent water flow from blocking and excessive sedimentation. There appeared to penetrate reasonable amount of sunlight to the stream, encouraging the establishment of channel and marginal vegetation, hence thinning of the existing trees would not be necessary in the short term, and in fact, it may be practically difficult due to their large sizes. Fence on the right bank on the bottom of the section was bending and some wood posts fell over, hence it requires repair.
There is great abundance of vegetation in terms of its coverage in the channel and banks which has the possibility of supporting various invertebrate species. However, the presence of foot paths on either side would cause a substantial disturbance to flora and fauna, preventing the migration of invertebrates between the grazing land and the stream in particular. One of the main purposes of the stream is to provide water flow to the mill, hence there could be much pressure on management for this use other than for wildlife enhancement. The existing habitat is of general interest for recreational reason, providing the reasonable ecological landscape, but less in conservation value. There is not a great potential to enrich wildlife along the stream mainly due to its purpose and the adjacent land uses, college in particular, but it should be maintained so as not to diminish the existing features.