Water is an essential component to support the activities of a plant and the mechanism of water transportation; uptake from the environment, i.e. soils and the atmosphere, distribution throughout the plant's body and release to the air, is highly developed.
The principle concept in analyzing water transportation in plant cells is energy transformation. According to the Thermodynamics, energy is never created or destroyed, but only transformed from one form to another, thus, the potential energy is expressed as the following Gibb's free energy equation;
Since water always moves downhill energetically, the transportation of water is calculated by difference in potential energy;
This is called
In plant cells, Water Potential is mainly affected by two factors; a solute concentration and the pressure, which is given by the following equation;
In addition, it is also defined that Since Therefore, the measurement of Water Potential in plant cells is carried out by the calculation of  1999 & Eichchorn.  2003).
The aim of this experiment was to investigate the features of osmosis in plant cells, using a potato tuber, by treating the tissues in sucrose solutions with different concentration.
Water always flows from the solution in the higher concentration to one in the lower, thus, taking account of the fact that the cell membrane is selectively permeable while cell wall is not, the following consequences were considered.
Five sucrose solutions in different concentrations of 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.8, 1.0 M and distilled water were prepared.
Two sets of six test tubes each containing 10 ml of one of the solution or distilled water were set up.
From a potato tuber provided, six cylinders of tissues with 4.5 cm in length were taken by using a cork borer, and by cutting the ends with a razor blade. It was checked that all the cylinders were clean, without any skin or eyes.
Each cylinder was accurately weighted and was cut into thin slices with about 2 mm thick and the pieces were transferred into one set of the tubes with different solutions. The operation on tissues was carried out in a moist paper towel to avoid the specimen to dry up.
For the other set of the tubes, a very small amount of blue dye, methylene blue was added.
The samples were incubated for at least one hour.
The slices of tissues were removed from the tubes and the final weight of each sample was measured.
A drop of methylene blue was carefully added to the the solutions in which the tissue samples have been incubated and the movement of a drop in each test tube was observed.
The calculation of osmotic potential for the solution which is equivalent to Water Potential of the examined plant cells was done.
The final weight of potato tuber tissues at 0.3 M sucrose solution was regarded as an error. Thus, from the reading of the graph, the concentration of sucrose solution in which no net change in weight occurred was:
Hence, the osmotic potential, which is the water potential of the examined potato tuber tissues was: