Genetic analysis has been widely used to give new insights in morphology, physiology, and evolution of the plant world. Genes play important roles in controlling morphology, some findings include he cossuppression of eukaryotic release factor 1-1 (eRF1) which form 'broomhead phenotype' at the inflorescence stem of Arabidopsis, ROT3 genes which cause elongation of leafy organs, Knotted-1 gene to be a key in the origin of the development of compound leaves. Furthermore, a model is constructed to explain the control mechanism of flowering initiation processes. In terms of evolutionary development, ABC model seems to be a profound theory to represent the identification of floral organs, and the function of S-genes in regulating the self-incompatibility and the effect on the evolutionary pathway of fertilisation is important. Genetic analysis is applied to the studies on sex-determination process in maize by masculinising genes and feminising genes, and polymorphism in fern species. Various methods such as AFLP (Amplified Fragment Length polymorphism) DNA-fingerprinting techniques, Quantitative Trait Locus (QTL) analysis are now available and have the high potential to be a great aid for many purposes beyond the scientific research in the future.
In the last few decades, the great advance of DNA analysis has contributed to solve many questions in the field of Plant Science. It is a very useful tool to investigate morphological, physiological features of plant body to the last details at molecular basis as well as to study on the development, differentiation and hence, evolutionary pathways of plant species. This report will review some research, firstly on the identification of DNA affecting the development of cells, leaf structure, shape of leaves and flowers and flowering time in terms of morphological expression of a plant body controlled by particular genes, secondly the role of DNA in evolution of organs, physiology of self-incompatibility, thirdly examples on the application of studies in sex determination process in maize and the uses of genetic analysis to investigate the species morphological variation, and look for the future prospectus on the study area.
The review by Shepard and Purugganan (5) on several studies on the genetic basis of morphological variation of flowers, inflorescence, and leaf development emphasises the importance of genetic analysis in terms of understanding evolutionary pathway.
'ABC model' is generally recognised today to dissect the specification of homeotic genes which lead to the development of floral organs; combination of three genes
identifies floral whorls (Table. 1). The roles of B and C function genes are suggested to be universal to all flowering plants from various studies (5) which implies the evolutionary events of the stamens and carpels might occurred only once. In coniferous plant species, orthologous genes in gnetophytes are highlighted in comparison, leading to the conclusion that B-function gene may be responsible for sexual gametes and C-function genes for reproductive development.
Unisexuality and zygomorphy are two important elements in revealing the refinement of floral morphology and homologous genes which differ in the patterns of expression among plant species are investigated in this study area. The theory of the independent development of unisexual flowers in angiosperms has been agreed but the evolutionary pathway has remained unknown. An interesting evidence from a phylogenetic study suggests the polyploidisation and breakdown of self-incompability to be significant in re-constructing sex-determination process in some species (5). Moreover, it has revealed that zygomorphic and antinomorphic flowers have occurred several times through transition in the evolution of angiosperms.
In terms of evolutionary significance, the variation in flower morphology might have been the strategy for pant species to prevent hybridization and to secure the successful breeding within species to some extent. It is supported that the adaptative importance between species in differentiating the inflorescence architecture can be revealed by the investigation on TERMINAL FLOWER 1 (TFL1) and LEAFY (LFY) homologs in angiosperms and the latter in particular, may also provide a clue in the evolution of angiospems to develop both male and female reproductive organs within a single floral organs.
Furthermore, as suggested by Hareven , et al (3), there has been independent evolution of compound leaves, however, other findings show the repeated suppression and resurrection of developmental pathways may have been a significant factor as in the evolutional patterns in reproductive organs (5).
The significance of identification of genes which correlate to the morphological features of a plant and the link with evolution is also highlighted by Irish and Benfey (9) with particular focus on the comparison of studies on Arabidopsis with those on other species. The study on homologous genes with the establishment of knowledge on the developmental programmes including the controlling mechanism in species other than Arabidopsis is suggested to provide useful theories to be applied into Arabidopsis. For instance, KNOX genes whose down-regulation stimulate leaf development were found in leaf primordia of species with compound leaves, the comparison of expression of these genes in tomato and Arabidopsis indicates the effect on the changes in the expression of genes to evoke different leaf forms through evolutionary events (3,5,9).In addition to the identification and direct comparison of target genes, this review remarks the importance of phylogenetic construction in developing the hypothesis on the traits of evolutionary changes across species.
The other approach in studying evolutionary developmental biology is the extension of models to natural variations. Three methods are discussed; firstly, Quantitative Trait Locus (QTL) analysis which is used to detect the co-occurrence of traits in the progeny derived from the crosses between subspecies. While this method is widely proposed in many studies (5) it is criticised that it poses the problem of insufficient identification at the gene level (9). Alternatives are multiple backcross in recombinant inbred lines which can effectively isolates the representative chromosomal regions, and comparative genomics which clarify the genetic origins of the adaptive traits by the comparison of genomes and their expression in related species. The validity of some techniques is still uncertain, however, it is supported that the advances in genetic analysis would find insights to solve questions on the evolutionary process of the development of plants (9).
Understanding the origin and developmental pathway of plant organs, physiology, and morphological variation and the traits of changes in genes offer vital clues to answer the evolution of plants. Genetic analysis on particular genes and the identification of their functions on morphological control over a plant body tells how plants are created. The relationship with external factors such as the environment also needs to be taken into account, however, no single environmental components only but a genome can evoke changes in morphology and physiology of plants. The application of findings to various purposes such as for agriculture has shown remarkable contribution. Recent progress on the methodology has expanded the possibility for study and the understanding of plant world.