Rice production is the most important farming system in Southeast Asia (Appendix 1). Six out of top ten countries in terms of rice production are tropical Southeast Asian countries (Pontius
Tropical Southeast Asia receives the abundant amount of rainfall and solar radiation throughout the year which enables the multiple harvests of rice in a year in the region. It is generally recognised that the cultivation of rice Rice production system is mainly divided into three types based on the adaptation method to the depth of flooding and degree of water control: upland rice, wet or paddy rice, grown in water less than 1 m deep and deep-water rice, the depth of water is usually 1-6 m (Hong In all systems, traditional rice farming was heavily dependent upon the intensive labour input particularly for weed management and preparation of seedlings for transplanting, and the yield was low due to loss by weeds, pests and inferior rice varieties (Khanh There has been an increase in the demand for rice with rapid population growth over the past few decades. Development of new varieties was therefore, motivated in order to improve the yield per unit area of land. In the 1960s, so-called Green Revolution started by the introduction of IR8: new high yielding rice cultivar, the successive introduction of improved cultivars followed and spread throughout Southeast Asia (Hong
The increased demand for rice has caused many changes in rice production system and land management in those countries. Increasing labour cost has led to promote the use of insecticide and herbicide which adversely resulted in the disruption on ecosystem and the increased risk to human health and environmental pollution (Hong In response to the recognition on the negative consequences induced by contemporary rice production system, Integrated Pest or Weed Management has been introduced into Southeast Asia since the 1990s. This management strategy puts an emphasis on the incooperation of Biological Control, minimum use of pesticide and education at farmers' level (Pontius Biological control is defined as 'the action of parasites, predators, and pathogens in maintaining another organism's density at a lower average than would occur in their absence' (McFadyen, 1998). Tropical Southeast Asia supports rich diversity of flora and fauna species owing to the climatic condition. Many species have adapted to traditional rice farming practices, creating natural occurring Biological Control mechanisms in the rice field (Pontius Recent research focus has been put on the reevaluation of such Biological Control on farming practice. This report will firstly outline the consequences of pest control in contemporary rice production system in the tropical Southeast Asia and the concept of Integrated Pest or Weed Management, secondly review some recent advances in Biological Control of pests and weeds which indicate the importance of integration of Biological Control in contemporary production system.
Great diversity of invertebrate community had developed to ensure the balanced population dynamics in rice insect pests, predators and parasitoids over time in Southeast Asia; however, insecticide application has destroyed this stable condition (IRRI, 2006b). Broad spectrum insecticide application was promoted based on the assumption that new varieties were susceptible to pest damages and that farmers were incapable of practicing the complex pest control procedure. Insecticide application was carried out on calendar-based schedule and ignored the differences in locality factors. Insecticide significantly damaged population of natural enemies such as spiders and other predacious insect species through 'turning off' of natural ecosystem, resulting in the widespread outbreak of insect pest, notably of stem borers The consequence of inappropriate evaluation on the role of natural Biological Control mechanism and misleading in insecticide use was the severe outbreak of pests and damages on rice (Pontius
Weeds in rice fields are the major biotic constraint on the yield reduction (table 2). Two important factors in contemporary system have contributed to the magnified weed problem over the last twenty to thirty years: change in production system and herbicide application. Increased labour costs have led to shift in production system from transplanted rice or deep water rice to direct seeded rice, of which wet-seeding is the common method (Moody, 1992). This change has caused an increase in weeds and the shift in the dominance of weed species from aquatic weeds to grassy weeds (IRRI, 2006c). The prioritisation on increasing weeds problem was on rapid, short-term solution, hence herbicide use was promoted. For instance, in Vietnam, although there was very small use of herbicide until the 80s; 0.5 % of total rice production area, there has been a dramatic increase in the 1990s. Herbicide accounts for 30.2 % of total pesticide use in all agriculture production in 2003. However, weed resistant to herbicide have emerged to colonise the field leading to the reduction of rice yield (Khanh
Findings from many field observations and research since the 1970s eventually revealed those adverse effects of contemporary rice farming system. The concept of Integrated Pest and/or Weed Management (IPM or IWM) has developed and came to be enforced at farmers' level in the 1990s (Pontius The primary objective of IPM and IWM is to incorporate natural occurring Biological Control in farming practice. There is a particular emphasis on farmers education in order to increase the awareness on the risk of environmental pollution and human health by excessive or mis-use of pesticide and to improve the understanding of natural Biological Control mechanism. Today IP/WM is an important farming strategy promoted by the governments in Southeast Asia and many field schools have been carried out (Fagan
Great diversity of flora and fauna in the tropical Southeast Asia which has evolved to coexist in rice fields indicates that there would be high potential for the utilisation of natural occurring Biological Control mechanisms to control pest and weed problems. Recent advances in research demonstrated the importance of land management and caution to the use of insecticide on natural enemies such as spiders and associated invertebrate species. Higher plants with allelopathic properties also possess the possibility as agents for weeds control. Land management is an important aspect to be considered in rice production in order to enhance the ability to control weeds and/or pests problems. Empirical studies need further investigation in order to assess the efficacy and feasibility in practice at farmers' level. In addition to current understanding, future findings on natural ecosystem of rice fields, on anthropogenic impacts on rice production and on interactions between human beings and people will provide fundamental knowledge for the development of Biological Control techniques in conjunction with other control methods.
Appendix 1