Ecosystem properties are regulated through interactions between abiotic factors such as soil fertility and climate and the functional traits of individual organisms that occur in a community (Hooper,. et al, 2005, Naeem,. et al, 1999). Two components in biodiversity, species richness which refers to the number of species present in a unit scale of a habitat, and functional diversity; the range of traits in which each species is distinguished from one another in a particular species pool, have been the focus of interests in biodiversity-ecosystem functioning study. Many research findings support that an increase in diversity leads to an increase in ecosystem functioning, which is often measured by productivity. If species added to a community differed in spatial and temporal patterns of resource uptake, an increase in diversity level would enhance the resource use efficiency which results in greater productivity (Kinzig,. et al, 2002, Loreau,. et al, 2002, Naeem,. et al, 1999). This review will outline the proposed mechanisms for this outcome in biodiversity-ecosystem functioning relationship and examine some aspects in the natural environment which have been given little attention in research but should be considered as important factors affecting those biodiversity effects.
The observed response patterns of ecosystem properties to changes in diversity; an increase in ecosystem functioning as diversity level increases, have led to suggest three qualitatively explicit mechanisms called Biodiversity Effects (Loreau,. et al, 2002, Naeem,. et al, 1999, Hector,. et al, 1999,);
While the consequences of sampling effects would be the dominance of some species achieved through the reduction in the biomass production of other species in high diversity level, niche complementarity and facilitation would cause overyielding; the total biomass in species mixture exceeds the yield of the most productive species in monoculture (Hector,. et al, 1999, van Ruijven & Berendse, 2005). It is predicted that those biodiversity effects would eventually reach saturating response as diversity increases.
However, it is argued that those effects are not mutually exclusive but a continuum effect (Hooper,.et al, 2005). High diversity is expected to contain both dominant species and complementary species and the distinction between the effects is not straightforward. In addition, some studies have pointed out that sampling effects may not be relevant to natural ecosystem since experiments often regard the species assemblage in a habitat as a random selection from the total species pool which does not occur in natural system in which a community develops via various biotic and abiotic interactions and selection mechanisms over time (Hooper,. et al, 2005).
Furthermore, it has been found that community composition as well as species richness and functional diversity in a community are important factors in regulating ecosystem properties. For instance, nutrient retention is suggested to be dependent upon the differences in phenological, biochemical structures of the dominant species. Soil processes such as decomposition, organic matter dynamics are regulated by microorganisms and fungi activities of whose are influenced by the species composition and functional characteristics of particular species (Bardgett & Shine, 1999, Hooper & Vitousek, 1998, Wardle, et al, 1997).
As already discussed, use of productivity for the measurement of biodiversity effects may not be fully self-explanatory to understand the mechanisms for the effects of species richness and functional diversity on ecosystem functioning. The response patterns of experimental plant community to modification in diversity level are likely to depend on the nature of processes measured and on the features and compartments of ecosystems. Some research using herbaceous plants found that the level of soil nutrient is reduced with increasing plant diversity due to the increase in process rate of an ecosystem at higher diversity (Loreau & Hector, 2001, Tilman, 1996). On the other hand, some studies on perennials found that ecosystem responses such as nutrient retention or nutrient use efficiency were at the highest in communities with only a couple of species (Hooper,. et al, 2005). Therefore, generalisation of the increasing new evidence from recent experiments on different aspects in this biodiversity-ecosystem functioning relationship is required.
One of the important indications from recent findings is that the magnitude of biodiversity effects varies not only with the functional traits of species in a community but also with the environmental context (Cardinale, et al, 2000, Dimitrakopoulos & Schmid, 2004, Fridley, 2001, Hooper,. et al, 2005). Differences in functional characteristics, distribution patterns, types of resources acquired by species involved are argued to affect complementarity and facilitation. Abiotic and biotic environmental conditions alter the strength of those effects and generate more variability in ecosystem functioning. It is predicted that resource enrichment may induce an increase in complementairy and the magnitude of facilitation is greater under unproductive, stressful environment (Hooper,. et al, 2005). However, the recognition on the importance of components in environment and its variation in terms of the control over complementarity and facilitation in a community has yet been under development in empirical study.
Environment is heterogeneous in both abiotic and biotic processes over spatial and temporal scales, resulting in the formation of patchiness in a habitat in physically discrete units. For organisms with limited mobility and specific environmental requirements, environment is a collection of habitat patches in terms of their survivorship while organisms in turn create a heterogeneous landscape due to their chance occurrence in environment (Dimitrakopoulos & Schmid, 2004, Tokeshi, 1999).
The importance of resource heterogeneity and aggregation has been overlooked in many experiments until recently. As new findings support, those two components in environment are likely to give different aspects in interpreting the results on biodiversity-ecosystem functioning relationship. In nature, environmental conditions are never homogenous while the experimental designs often mislead those factors. In conclusion, it is expected that studies which include the consideration to the impacts of heterogeneity in resource acquisition and aggregation over spatial and temporal scale on ecosystem functioning would be an interesting question in revealing biodiversity effects.