Changes in the structure and features of woodland are dynamic both in spatial and temporal scale. In terms of the span of an event in woodland there is great variation, dominant trees may live up to 300 or 500 years while significant changes may occur within a very short period of time. For instance, a storm may level stand trees in a large area within an hour, but the successive reformation of woodland would take several decades after such a disturbance. Gap formation and regeneration may continuously take place in an interval of a few decades. On the other hand, field and ground layer vegetation which is comprised of various annual and perennial grasses, herbs and shrubs have much shorter life cycle (Kirby and Morecroft, 2000). Due to such a variety of effects on woodland process most of which last longer than the duration of experiment, monitoring on site is often impractical. Therefore, prediction on the changes of woodland structure is very difficult. This is particularly problematic when dealing with the changes in field and ground layer vegetation which are strongly influenced by the growth of other layer vegetations and the environment. One useful tool for this purpose is a simulation model. This report summarises the attempt to construct a model which demonstrates changes in woodland structure over time with an attention to the understory vegetation cover and factors affecting the rate of increase on the filed and ground layer vegetation in order to take account of those factors in planning of woodland management.
The environment of the herbaceous understory vegetation is modified by the dominants in the plant community, i.e. canopy layer trees which change the amount of radiation penetrated through to the filed and ground layer and affect the proportion of intercepting precipitation (Fedeer and Tanner, 1966). Although there is a great difficulty in investigating the relative importance and correlation of those factors on the growth of understory vegetation primarily due to technical problems in measuring on site and complexity of those factors which interact easch other (Anderson et al, 1968), there are several studies which investigated the effects of each factor. According to Shirely (1945), development of understory vegetation is greatly suppressed under limited light intensity of less than 4% of full sunlight. This finding was supported by another study which demonstrated that the increasing light intensity leads to the changes in the shoot to root ratio of plants, the allocation of biomass is inclined to shoots in order to increase the level of light interception (Blackman and Wilson, 1951). In terms of precipitation, general recognition is that two mechanisms are involved in affecting the understory vegetation. Firstly, the interception of precipitation by the canopy layer and the surface litter limits the total amount of precipitation available to the understory vegetation. Secondly, competition over moisture which penetrate to the forest floor between canopy layer trees and understory vegetation. Throughfall precipitation which is defined as the proportion of the precipitation faling directly through holes in the canopy to the forest floor (Voigot, 1960) is one of important components in the total amount of precipitation and moisture available to understory vegetation (Anderson et al, 1968).
Based on such findings, Anderson et al (1968) investigated how herbaceous understory vegetation cover respond to canopy cover, light intensity, and throughfall precipitation in coniferous natural forest and relative importance of those factors in relation to the significance of effects on understory vegetation cover. Three factors are revealed as important factors in regulating the environment of the field and ground layer, thus the understory vegetation cover. Firstly, the canopy openness: changes in understory vegetation cover were proportional to canopy openness as expressed in % canopy opening relative to the completely opened condition without trees. Secondly, modification of light and throughfall precipitation by the canopy layer: the correlation between light and understory vegetation cover was significant, with an increase in light intensity, undersotry vegetation cover increased. The same pattern of response was found in the case of throughfall precipitation. Thirdly, environmental factors: one suggestion was moisture content of the upper soil layer which seemed to have effects on the distribution of roots of understory vegetation, however, the importance of such factor was suggested to be less than that of the other two factors. This early study demonstrated that canopy openness, light intensity and throughfall precipitation as major factors which have control over the understory vegetation cover, suggesting the throughfall precipitation as the most important. Although such study has not been given much attention in recent years, study by Thomas et al (1999) which examined the effects of thinning and fertiliser addition on the understory vegetation also support that the significance of those factors in regulating the growth of understory vegetation.
In terms of the correlation between canopy openness and understory vegetation cover, finding by Anderson et al (1968) showed the understory vegetation was 3200 cm of cover per m under 60% canopy opening which is equivalent to the canopy openness in 15 years (*1), and 400 cm under 20% canopy opening which corresponds to the condition in 100 years (*2). Undersoty vegetation cover in response to the proportion of throughfall rainfall was also similar: with 80% of throughfall rainfall, there was 3000 of understory vegetation cover per m (*3) and with 30%, 1000 cm (*4). Trends in understory vegetation cover was proportional to the increase in canopy opening and the increase in the throughfall precipitation (Anderson et al, 1968, Thomas et al, 1999), which indicate that the reduction in understory vegetation cover over time due to canopy closure is consistent with this outcome in the model. Therefore, it is concluded that this model fits to the purpose of the objective for the simulation.
Among all factors, the most important factors affecting the changes in understory vegetation over time was the rate of regeneration: emergence of new plants of undestory vegetation. With regeneration rate of 0.5 (output 1) where 50% of existing understory vegetation is successful in reproduction and regeneration, the understory vegetation cover grows up to 8500 m in the first ten years when trees are relatively small with low competitive ability. Irrespective of the growth of trees over time which limits the resource partitioning to the understory vegetation, high regeneration rate is able to support large area of understory vegetation, or it is likely that the growth of trees may be inhibited which is not included in this model. On the other hand, low regeneration rate, such as 0.02 (output 5), the understory vegetation is unable to compete with trees and cannot maximise the available light and throughfall rainfall for the growth of existing vegetation even in the early stages of woodland. Failure in regeneration leads to the significant reduction in the understory vegetation cover in long term, only 500 m in area is covered with understory vegetation in 100 years time.
Such outcomes imply that the recovery of undersotry vegetation is profoundly dependent on the regeneration success of plants, which is consistent with the real world circumstances (Radford, 1998, Read and Frater, 1999). The life cycle of herbaceous understry vegetation is much shorter than trees, so that the undersotry vegetation cover is likely to be significantly sensitive to the rate of regeneration other than the environmental factors such as light intensity, throughfall precipitation as the extent of modification in the environment by those factors may be slow to magnify and induce impacts over time, although abrupt changes may occur, such disturbances may be less significant to regulate the quick generation changes in understory vegetation.
There is much potential of this model for use in practice. This model enables to monitor how understory vegetation cover is influenced by combination of various factors in the environment and the rates of regeneration and death which directly relate to the relative reproductive success of plants. This model is a simplified representation on the processes which regulate the field and ground layer feature, hence there are some other factors excluded here which require further analysis on existing data and integration of those factors into a model. The rate of increase in existing vegetation which is referred to the response of understory vegetation cover to canopy openness and throughfall rainfall is based on the estimation. The relative importance of those factors and correlation between each other or inclusion of other factors should be investigated, and the equation needs to be formulated with reliable evidence in reality.
As demonstrated in example scenarios, this model is particularly useful to examine how human management in the long term would affect the undersotry vegetation feature, in this model, simply the cover in area. Such application of this model is meaningful in the real world situation if the estimate on the consequences of management was able to provide a reliable evidence to support the planning of the project.
The difficulty in the construction of this model was lack of available data which fit to the objective of the model; hence the values used were heavily dependent upon the estimation. There may be some significant failures in presenting the findings from observational study. Nevertheless, the general trend response pattern in the understory vegetation cover over time was consistent with the indication obtained from the outcomes by other research.
In conclusion, the constructed model meets the objective to evaluate the changes in field and ground layer vegetation cover in one hectare of U.K temperate woodland newly planted for multi-purposes over 100 years. The model successfully demonstrated how factors such as regeneration, death of plants, canopy closure, available light intensity, and the proportion of rainfall precipitates to field and ground layer influence the changes in undersotry vegetation cover. By modifying the inputs of those factors, the model also allows to illustrate how human management may induce changes over time. In the construction process, principle steps were followed; 1: definition of the system and the objective, 2: data gathering to search for existing information on the particular purpose, 3: construction of a model, 4: validation of the outcome and the model, 5: sensitivity analysis to investigate which factors cause significant impacts on the variable, and 6: use of model as illustrated in the scenarios. Therefore, this model has a high potential to be applied in practice.