In land planning processes, land use suitability analysis has been recognised as an important step to provide reliable information as help on decision making for stakeholders involved. Land use suitability analysis is defined as to identify the most appropriate spatial pattern for potential land uses based on the investigation on the requirements of land features for a specific purpose, on preferences and on the predicted activities and their impacts on land (Makczewski, 2004). For instance, the targets include identification of potential habitat for wildlife, analysis on agricultural land use, and regional development planning. It is often aimed at proposing the best site for the specific purposes by ranking and rating the known characteristics of alternative candidate sites, such as location, size, climate, geological features, and proximity to important sites (Makczewski, 2004, Phua and Minowa, 2005).
Geographical Information System (GIS) has been widely used as a tool for such analysis in land use planning. One example is forest management or conservation planning. Important function of GIS in forest planning is the ability to integrate various information in maps as associated databases, providing an answer which meets a set of criteria on planning in spatial context (Zek and Keles, 2005). The primary use of GIS was in forestry with aims to store maps in electric forms and to perform calculations such as areas, distances. It is now increasing applied for analysis to solve complex problems, for example, selection of sites for conservation, evaluation of alternative land uses (Makczewski, 2004, Zek and Keles, 2005). Spatial database in GIS may contain ownership boundaries, locations of roads, water courses, elevation, soil maps, and climatic features which enables practitioners to examine what activities to be carried out in which spatial scales. GIS also provides an aid to visualise landscape pattern of a forest, such as shape, size, distribution of patches or management units, spatial relationships between different land characteristics such as urban areas, agricultural land. Such spatial structure and features of forest determine biodiversity, aesthetic values, and susceptibility to disturbances (Zek and Keles, 2005, Phua and Minowa, 2005).
The aim of this report is to illustrate the use of GIS in forest planning. In particular, objectives are to find the potential site for creating buffer zones from motor ways for neighbouring communities around the existing community forest Watling Chase in London, U.K and to investigate criteria for further evaluation on planning.
Watling Chase Community Forest is in south Hertfordshire and north London which consists of 188 km area of a mixture of farmland, meadows, wildlife areas, hedgerows and woodland as well as public open space and the urban fringe (Fig. 1). This forest is one of 12 Community Forests in England established in 1990 by the then-Countryside Commission as pilot project areas to demonstrate the potential contribution of forests to economic and to social regeneration (England's community forests, 2007, Watling Chae Community Forest, 2007). According to the Review 2005, the suggested key sites of interest in Watling Chase for the future management are new plantation along motor way corridors in order to reduce the impact of traffic fumes on air quality (Vaughan, 2005). Therefore, evaluation of areas for the potential buffer zone is an important process to be carried out for this target and for deliberation of the actual plans.
Accuracy of the representation of information in GIS database is a very important matter in real world application. Representation of social, economic features in the environment as well as geographical elements is the first priority consideration (Makczewski, 2004, Phua and Minowa, 2005). Moreover, the process to combine objective and subjective information such as judgments and preferences is vital in order to reflect every view and feature which contributes to decision making on the target land. Demonstration of information in the form of maps by GIS approach has a risk that it may be misleading by over-influencing the value system of map developer (Makczewski, 2004). In this case of forest planning, conversion of land to woodland as buffer zone involves evaluation of socio-economic gain and losses by potential activities. Decision in such case would be complex, and should be made in conjunction with consultation with local people, land owners and uses. In order to achieve satisfactory agreement on land planning, information provided on the produced maps is very important and maps should contain all the required data sets for evaluation.