Rice is staple food in Sri Lanka, a tropical island country in South Asia. Rice production is the most important agriculture and economic sector in the country. Rice is produced in the majority of the geographical areas in this country owing to high rainfall throughout the year and constant high temperature. Although the government policy framework, for instance, major irrigation projects, have been successful in increasing the rice productivity since its independence in 1948 to 1977, productivity has reached the peak in the 1980s and has been stagnated to date. Major constrains are excess and misuse of agrochemicals have been the primary problem not only for weed and pest control but also for environmental pollution and health hazards over the few decades, decline in soil fertility and negative or zero net benefit to farmers due to the consequences of economic liberalisation which allowed private sectors to control marketing. This report will suggest some important focuses for future development. In relation to the improvement in farming practices of individual farmers and government support, focuses should be; use of appropriate cultivars and timely cultivation, soil fertility improvement by addition of manure or rice straws and minimum use of fertilisers, Integrated Weed, Pests and Disease Management, post harvest management by construction of on-farm storage facility, and setting up of extension services.
The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka is a island country south to India with population of 19.462 million in 2006 (Fig 1). It is a developing country classified as 'most seriously affected by the international economic crises' by the United Nations (Amarasinghe and Liyanage, 2001, IRRI, 2006). Rice production is the most important agriculture sector in Sri Lanka with an annual production of 2.7 million tones (95%of the domestic requirement). Rice is staple food providing the dietary values of 45 % of total calorie and 41 % of protein for one Sri Lankan. Consumption of rice is 100 kg per capita in 1998 and this figure is estimated to be stable to date. In terms of production sector, 30 % of the total labour force is directly or indirectly engaged Fig 1. Map of Sri Lanka (CAOD, 2006)
in rice production and marketing, there are 1.8 million rice-producing farmers 70 % of which belongs to small folder with less than 1 hectare of agriculture land. 0.77 hectare; 34 % of the total cultivated land is under rice cultivation (Premaratne and Premalal, 2006, IRRI, 2006)
Although life expectancy, health standards and education levels are high compared to other South and Southeast Asian countries the majority of rural subsistent farmers are poor due to stagnation in the rice yield and reduced profitability in recent years (Jones, 2002). Population growth is low but the base population is high in Sri Lanka and there is a need to increase productivity and improve production efficiency in order to meet the increase in food demand (Dhanapala, 2000, Gunatilleke, 1994, Jones, 2002). This report will illustrate a case study of rice production system in Sri Lanka, evaluate constraints on the current productivity and appraise some suggestions for development.
In relation to the improvement in farming practices of individual farmers and government support, several focus points are identified from the revealed major constrains; cultivars and timely cultivation, soil fertility improvement, weed, pests and disease management, post harvest management, and extension services. Extension of agricultural land was recognised as impractical since the majority of productive land has already been converted to agriculture purposes. However, cropping intensity can be increased from 119 % of the current figure to 136 % which enables to increase the total cultivated land area to 0.96 million hectares (0.77 million hectare in 2006). Prioritisation should be given to Low Country Wet Zone and the areas with minor irrigation systems in the Dry or Intermediate Zones where there has been an increase in neglect of rainfed rice cultivation.
In order to increase productivity of rice, there is a need to change farming practices and land management at individual farmers' level. Pest, weed and disease management should adopt Integrated Pest or /and Weed Management which have been successful in Southeast Asia. Timely cultivation with appropriate cultivars which matches with locality factors is also important. Post harvest management, particularly construction of on-farm storage facility would benefit farmers not only by improving the storage quality but also by enabling sales of rice with higher price in the off-season. The government role is education of farmers and setting extension services to support farming activities. Therefore, it is suggested that those recommendations should be implemented by the government in conjunction with robust support from socio-aspects in order to raise the social status of farmers, hence to encourage young generation to be engaged in rice production. Integration of those various approaches is essential to increase biological production and farmers' profit from rice production.