These ironical aspects are both evident in the plot and in the relationships between characters, whilst simultaneously being imbedded in the structure of the text.
 The act of writing a letter implies an intimate and deeply personal relationship, yet this notion is subverted by Laclos, who explores the ways in which this form of expression can be corrupted and used perversely. This is apparent in la marquise de Merteuil's correspondence with Madame de Volanges, in which she advises her not to grant her daughter permission to marry Danceny on mercenary grounds, stating ' In a letter to Valmont, however, her true feelings are revealed and her desire to destroy her confidante is exposed, writing ' This highlights the ironic transformation of the letter from an intimate document expressing genuine emotion, into an instrument of deception. The order and time that the letters are received imbues the text with an additional source of irony. This is particularly evident in letter 126, in which Madame de Rosemonde praises la pr Whilst it is possible that this letter would have prevented the liaison between them, it is received by la pr The letter is therefore denied the ability to facilitate a change in la presidente's actions and is used by Laclos as a symbol of impotence and dramatic irony.
One of the reasons as to why Merteuil and Valmont behave as they do towards other people is that they are jealous of each other's exploits, yet 'seek each other's admiration and plaudits." Letter 10 is one such example where la marquise includes a lengthy description of her satisfaction with her new lover Belleroche: ' This rivalry of lovers continues throughout the novel and characterises their relationship. It is all the more ironic that, whilst they 'consider each other as the only audience whose applause is worth having, so that they depend on each other for praise which they are both equally reluctant to give'
It appears a safe assumption that Valmont is in love with la marquise and throughout the novel he constantly tries to impress and seduce her. The irony lies in the fact that Valmont, in order to be rewarded with one night with la marquise, attempts to seduce la pr The resulting confusion for Valmont paves the way for his downfall. The scapegrace's basic tenet is that falling in love leads to a loss of control, a langour to which he will never succomb; he and Merteuil are ' Valmont projette de lui-m '
It becomes almost immediately obvious that Laclos is writing not entirely about true love but about the dangers of seduction as well. It could be contested that the sentient characters, ironically, are not bound merely by love - but almost by duty. La pr In letter 77, Valmont skilfully uses reversal of reality to manipulate the truth and also la pr He employs such verbs as '
There are also smaller yet equally deliberate incongruities in the novel: whilst Madame de Tourvel is portrayed as completely innocent - ' [ The ironic treatment of relationships includes Danceny's assistance to Valmont in seducing his beloved C Perhaps the main sardonic relationship is that C Madame de Volanges only shows great concern when it is too late and her daughter has already been seduced by Valmont.
The ending of the novel and the punishment the characters receive from Laclos is ironic in itself. Although he has punished the vice of his ' La marquise controls everyone in the novel, and militates even against Valmont: 'She has experimented with counterfeiting emotions and has discovered that she can mislead others." Whilst Valmont's egocentric image is that of complete control, shown perhaps through his self directed usage of heroic images - such as his donation to save the troubled family who gathered round him exclaiming: ' [and Valmont thought he] It is ironic, therefore that she succeeds at all but she does destroy Valmont - ' Such is human nature, the reader does not hate Merteuil or Valmont until the end of the novel as 'they appeal to an aspect of our own personality which...we feel we ought to suppress' This is ironic and Laclos here deliberately manipulates the reader's emotions to shock him with the novel's dramatic conclusion.
It is ironic; therefore, that Merteuil is destroyed as well. By punishing her more than Valmont, Laclos stresses that she placed too much confidence in her own abilities. Losing her lawsuit and having letters 81 and 85 circulated in Paris is not enough for the author and 'physical retribution is exacted through her contraction of smallpox, and her consequent disfigurement is emblematic of her moral corruption." Yet more ironic is that it is her own 'act of single folly' Indeed it is the height of irony that one who boasts so much of her ' '