Sheepdrove is an organic farm in Berkshire, which comprises of a traditional mixed farm of 2300 acres, with1700 sheep, 180 suckler beef cows, 80 sows, around 20,000 poultry, mixed cereals and also composting and turkeys at Christmas.
Organic farming is an approach to agriculture aiming to create integrated, humane, and environmentally friendly, as well as economically sustainable production systems. Currently organic sales are growing by two million pounds per week, twice the rate of the total food market (Soil Association 2004). This has meant that organic food sales have increased 10% in the last year with sales now at 1.12 billion. This information shows that Sheepdrove is in a thriving market.
At present Sheepdrove sell their produce direct to consumers through their home delivery, and website. They also sell some chickens through a Waitrose contract. The remaining produce gets sold to local butchers and a shop in Bristol. Selling direct to customers has built them a good reputation and allows them to achieve the highest profits, rather then selling through a retailer. Organic farming has shown to be a highly consumer driven system, with specialised buyers who are looking for specific qualities and issues such as: -
Peace of mind- There is currently no proof that organic produce is better or healthier than mass produced produce but people feel because it is higher priced and the media coverage it has had it is better for you therefore making them more content.
Perceived social status and quality- People feel that as the produce is more expensive and natural it is of higher quality. Because of the price not everyone can afford to buy organic therefore those that do feel they have a perceived social status.
Environmentally friendly produce- Scientific evidence has shown that organic farming is better for the environment. People feel very strongly about protecting the environment and therefore prefer to buy organic.
Animal welfare- Organic farming practices have higher animal welfare, this is a selling point of organic meat, which Sheepdrove emphasise greatly.
Sheepdrove addresses all of these qualities people are looking for and uses them as selling points for their produce.
One of the main aspects of their business is poultry production. Most poultry is sold through the business but they also have a contract with Waitrose to supply 30% of their production a week.
The way in which their organic method of production compared to conventional is with the origin of the animals, the feed, disease prevention and housing.