It could be argued that the films to be analysed are all, in their own different ways, effective vehicles of propaganda. This paper will firstly seek to establish an appropriate definition of propaganda, and to judge what makes good cinema propaganda. It will then go on to examine the specific "themes" of propaganda present in
Richard Taylor states that "propaganda is an attempt either unconsciously or part of a systematic campaign by an individual or group holding certain beliefs or desired ends, to influence others to adopt identical attitudes." It is an attempt to create a uniform system of beliefs or attitudes amongst a target audience and can be done through numerous ways be it visually, the use of the spoken word or a combination of the two. The systematic propagation of a doctrine or cause however, is useless without an audience; by far the most effective means of propaganda will play on the target's emotions and will often, but not specifically, be most successful paraded "under the disguise of "information"". To determine whether propaganda firstly as general concept can be effective I will use the example of Nazi propaganda: towards the end of the Second World War after Hitler's defeat in his personal crusade to take Stalingrad, fanatical resistance was still being put up by the German populace, even when all appeared to be lost and "the fact that these wretches were made to go on fighting for a worthless, evil cause, in which Hitler himself no longer believed, was the lasting achievement of Nazi propaganda."
Goebbels regarded cinema as "one of the most modern means of mass persuasion." The strength of propaganda in the form of film is that it can incorporate the use of the spoken word and sound with the unique power of a visual image. Bramstead views film as a "major instrument of effective propaganda because of its four specific qualities: (1) subjective emotional appeal; (2) limitation of contents; (3) possibility of using it throughout to illustrate the fighting attitude and (4) continuous and uniform repetition." It is also noteworthy that the film genre would enable the crossing of boundaries of class and intellect unlike radio and newspapers respectively. The potential monotony associated with the sound of the pleonastic politician, for example, can be made much more interesting and the rhetoric more understandable when coupled with cinematic montage. The subtle propagandist should manipulate the appeal of film as an escape from reality for the masses and amalgamate art and propaganda to achieve persuasion.
Within the three films in question certain themes of propaganda can be found such as a portrayal of economic or social imbroglio versus nationalistic pride, hope, youth, family values, sacrifice, a call for action and a portrayal of an enemy. However, before examining the leitmotifs of the films themselves, it is important to acknowledge that there are differences in the structure and intentions of the works which also determine their affectivity. Perhaps the most obvious difference to point out is the fact that The appeals in the films are therefore completely different - whilst the Nazi films appeal to the emotions of the viewer, However, Both do deal with myths but whilst  It is also significant to note that the events of the Nuremburg Rally are not chronological in the film which shows that it cannot be a true objective documentary and is, in reality, Riefenstahl manipulating the viewer and the events through editing. For example Hitler addressing the S.A. was actually on 9
The structural difference between the two Nazi films can almost be personified using the models of Hitler and Goebbels. Hitler's basic tenet of effective propaganda was that it "must be limited to very few points and must harp on these in slogans until the last member of the public knows what you mean." This comes into play in Goebbels, however, was much more interested in a covert approach and thought that politics and art "could be subtly mixed"
Perhaps the focus of Riefenstahl's work, as a propaganda tool, in Indeed the film is a portrayal of might of the Nazi machine. The very title, which was devised by Hitler himself, is significant as it stresses not only the triumphant presence of the Nazis but also includes the 'will' of the nation: "The strength of the nation...[is] seen to lie in the submergence of the individual will in the will of the nation". The first shot in the film is of the Nazi eagle coupled appropriately with Wagnerian style orchestral music by Herbert Windt. This serves two purposes: firstly the music serves to emphasise the titles by Ruttmann which are hard hitting and this creates the opening sequence to be one of considerable drama. This concept matches David Hinton's belief that "Windt's music plays a key role in forming the audience response to the titles. Beginning with sorrowful, mournful notes that underline the message of the titles." Secondly, Windt's music is chosen in particular to underline the change in tone which is to be introduced towards the next sequence in the film. The mood becomes slightly more positive and just as the titles describe the Reich as the "
The constant images of the two Nazi symbols serve not only to remind the viewer of the presence of Nazism but also to link the two entities of the party and the nation. One particular example is when Hitler addresses the S.A. to reassure them after the R This is an effective propaganda technique as the viewer is mesmerised by not only the number of flags by the movement they make, drawing them further into the film and at the same time further towards National Socialism. The film also ends with S.A. men juxtaposed on the image of a swastika and the fact that the film begins and finishes with Nazi images is significant as they convey a great sense of national pride to the viewer.
This is similar to Another similarity between the two Nazi films is the presence of order and pride associated with National Socialism and this is perhaps best seen through the behaviour and dress of the Hitler Jugend (HJ). As in This powerful technique again serves as a constant reminder of the presence of the party and gives the aura of all men proud to fight for Germany, taking her into the future and avenging the Treaty of Versailles. The Nazis in
In The first few shots of the film are a montage of newspaper headlines, juxtaposed before the images become specifically the front pages. This would highlight the fact that the situation was becoming increasingly worrying - this is symbolised by the headlines becoming more dramatic and more dominating on the front pages. This montage is coupled with rapid staccato music and this erraticism mirrors the economic and social problems of the time. We see immediately the unemployment figures rising until one headline reads that there are now almost " The issue of unemployment continues when we see the mass of unemployed people scrambling to get hold of a newspaper to see if there are any jobs; they are of course unsuccessful and the camera focuses on the faces of the young men to illustrate their resigned ness. One of the most powerful scenes in the film is that of the hunt of the boys for jobs on their bicycles. The use of close-ups here is particularly interesting; the focus is on the boys' feet and the pedals of the bike moving faster and faster. The music highlights the desperate attempt to search for work and it seems that the faster they pedal the more in vain their quest becomes. The power and effect this image would have on a Weimar audience would be especially strong as Brecht is dealing here with reality and the depression that Germany suffered from 1929 onwards.
It is not only unemployment which Brecht uses to illustrate his dissatisfaction with the Weimar system, many other negative images associated with industry and housing are also prominent throughout the film. All shots of factories in the film are with the camera looking up at black, dirty intimidating buildings - often with large gates preventing the job seekers from entering. The fact that the B This technique of Brecht depicting the difficulties of an individual is one of the main differences in propaganda techniques between
Although One depiction of this is through the sports festival in which the team members are working together for a common objective. This however, as noticed by Marc Silberman serves predominantly to highlight the censorship which is "camouflaged behind the relatively harmless allegory of mass sports races." When the song is sung the workers are moving in unison towards their goal but in comparison to the geometric patterns of the masses in Whereas the workers in Perhaps the best example to note is at the very beginning of the film where the mobility of Riefenstahl's camera work from the air coupled with the dreamy music of There are also many static scenes of the mass in One such example is when Hitler S.A. Chief Lutze and S.S. Chief Himmler walk down the aisle between thousands of S.A. men towards the War Memorial, the cameras here were installed on flagpoles to emphasise the enormity of the occasion.
The idea of unity is also fundamental in Here we see the importance of emotive and personal language as a tool of propaganda to inspire the viewer and more importantly to relate the film to them as an individual as part of the ideally portrayed aggregate. Another example is when the HJ leader is discussing with Heini's father what should be done about his future the winning argument comes from the leader who after asking Herr V " The two Nazi films use language often as a tool for an appeal to the emotion of the viewer and his lust for patriotism. In
The theme of hope is also an important propaganda technique. In   Hitler when speaking always addresses large numbers of people and enjoys a fervent response. His language is also extremely inspirational and when coupled with his oratory is an extremely powerful propaganda tool. One feels part of the crowd when being asked by Hitler to unite and fight for Germany. Riefenstahl manipulates his special talent through her camera work and the These low-angled shots and this technique can be traced back to "Renaissance aesthetics when statues were mounted on pedestals and viewed from below." He is seen as a man who enjoys greeting people and exudes "a benevolent paternal air." Everything is centered on him and this is best shown when he visits the HJ and the boys are on their tiptoes straining to get a look at him. Another amusing shot is a close-up of a cat that stops cleaning itself and looks up when he arrives. Hitler is always shot alone whereas the individual is submerged in the symmetry and order of the mass scenes.
Hitler at the beginning of the film arrives in a plane and the images of clouds and the soft music portrays him as a godlike figure looking down on his people below. Before we see Hitler we feel his presence; he is a saviour and has come to give hope to those who have recently suffered economic and social turmoil. The image of the The natural force of fire symbolises the strength and hope the Third Reich will bring in the two Nazi films, the eternal flame is a simile for Hitler's promise of a "thousand year Reich".
 When competing against each other no matter how fast they ride they never get anywhere whereas when working together with a common goal they can achieve this. They are "brilliantly organized... [the young people] have a political character, and the recreation of the masses has the mark of militancy." The singing of the working classes and the fact that they move in unison in the right direction also gives the viewer a hope that something better is to come.
In Indeed the film is directed at the young and was subtitled "A film about German youth and its spirit of sacrifice." Indeed after seeing the film and the heroics of Heini and the display of discipline and purpose of the HJ it would be almost impossible, qua child, not to want to join. It is particularly noteworthy that Riefenstahl juxtaposes the image of workers marching with the swastika in the background; this is significant as it leaves the audience with a great sense of hope. They are marching towards the sky which is where the film began. Steinhoff uses a similarly effective technique to end his film - that of the flag again with Heini's blood on it and then a similar montage of a division of HJ. The determination of the faces is similar to the depiction of them in These are Heini's last words and the faces of the HJ are almost being led by Heini's heroic face.
As with the theme of national pride versus a lust for the alternative, the portrayal of workers in At the Introduction of the Labour Corps, Riefenstahl shows the workers as a mini army. They march in unison exactly like the military do and are given the same treatment by the This is undoubtedly because Hitler realised that to build the war machine capable of carrying out his global ambitions, Germany needed a completely new infrastructure. The solidarity of the military can be compared to that of the workers through Riefenstahl's use of close-ups: in the first sequence we see a group of S.A. men linked together and the camera zooms in to focus on the clenched fists around each other's belts. This is mirrored in the close-up of the workers fists gripping their spades. This not only stresses the importance of the unity of the two groups but also metaphorically the tools of the workers are just as important as the weapons of the military. This is a powerful technique as it explains that everyone has an important role to play in Germany's rebirth. This would appear to contradict the theory of Boguslaw Drewniak who argues that "
 Riefenstahl perhaps subtly hints at a strong German family here. One argument for However, it is the "traditional authoritarian structure of the German family" This antediluvian institution is replaced in favour of a new family; in Heini's case, "he has found a substitute in the fellowship of his new comrades"
In Brecht also includes such anathemas as abortion and marriage as an option because is it the obvious thing to do. The theme of family values not being present in the Weimar Republic is made clear when Anni looks on longingly at school children before being brought abruptly back to reality realising that she is homeless, redundant and her brother has just committed suicide.
The issue of sacrifice is particularly important in Heini dies as a hero realizing that "he is one small cog in a much more powerful machine" [es ist] The fact that he dies for the cause makes him a martyr and he is " This is an effective technique of propaganda and can be compared to the suicide in Brecht implies that this is the "fate of an entire social class" However, this is not as effective as the technique by Steinhoff whose death is one of heroism and climax, as "the audience will not even want to stop him [Franz]". Particularly significant is that Franz removes his watch before jumping, in an admission that it has great value and although he has failed his family can use it to attempt to survive in this world. He is shot through a suspended bicycle to relate the troubles directly to that of the unemployed seen previously. It is important for the propagandist to foster the sacrifice of the 'self' in favour of the majority and through close-ups in
Although Heini's father is an aggressive, antiquated Communist who is directly compared with the thoughtful and visionary HJ leader. Another method of comparison is the order and unity of the Nazis compared with the chaotic scenes given to the Communists who drink and smoke. Ulla is infinitely more disciplined than her Communist counterpart Greda who is associated with the opiates of the Communists and often uses her sexuality to her advantage. The use of light portrays Nazism as the future, bright and honest with the Communists always in the dark - metaphorically hinting at their evil intent.
To attempt to come to some sort of conclusion the possible affectivity of the three films will be brought into context using the arguments already made in this essay. It is important when doing this to disestablish oneself from the eventualities which are known to have occurred and the atrocities which stemmed form the Nazi vehicles of propaganda.  Audrey Salkeld believed the film to be successful in "conveying something of the new mystique that Nazism claimed to introduce into all spheres of cultural life." It is also a film which will be remembered in terms of revolutionary cinematic techniques. However, unlike in The work is clearly only staged reality and Riefenstahl " The film could become boring after the impression of the viewer with powerful oratory and the immense support for National Socialism had worn off.
 Perhaps the biggest testimony to the film's intrinsic power as a piece of propaganda is that it was banned and 'only after substantial cuts were made was it released for general showing." However, it seems that Brecht asks quite a lot of a viewer and one needs to be thinking all the time to keep up with not only the irony but also the plot itself. The film was not even allowed to be shown in the Soviet Union as 'the Soviet audience could not understand the suicide of a worker who owned a bicycle and a watch'
The conclusion therefore to be reached is that Not only did it win the highest It has a simple plot and the heroism is particularly gratifying and would have been particularly so for the younger section of the population it was geared to. The film gives "a certain realism to otherwise clich It is the ideal mixture of art and propaganda and is the only one of the three who depicts the "enemy" in a successful way.