The game Rachet and Clank is based on inter-planetary exploration. The object of the game is to collect as many gadget and weapons (which I will, from now onwards, collectively refer to as object) for their inventory. There are 11 objects in total to collect with their PseudoCode identifier (see appendix 1).
During play items can be picked up or dropped. If an item is picked up it is checked against the current inventory and if it already had been collected a message is flagged to the user saying so. If the user wishes to drop an object they can check their inventory for a list of their objects and select one to drop. If the object they wish to drop is not in their inventory a message is flagged asking the user to verify their selection. If not the object is dropped.
 The value changes as items are picked up/ dropped from the inventory. The SC set is effectively a control set (holding all the values which are required to finish the game) which can be checked against the inventory.
 The inventory is checked after every pick up as this is when items are added to the inventory as this is the when the inventory is changed. The inventory is also changed when items are dropped although seeing as the max for the inventory is 11 a check would have been performed when the last item was added.
 Instructions will take a finite amount of time as we are using comparisons between two sets, or value of sets.
The algorithm checks the inventory after every pick up rather than at every point something changes during play. When the inventory is being checked it is first checked for the amount of items in the inventory. If this number is less than 11 then play continues (as a user cannot have a full set of objects without 11 items) if 11 are found then the next stage is undertaken where the inventory is checked against the control set.
Any application that store information on objects could use sets. For example books and multimedia in a library, the sets would contain books that are on the shelf, book on loan etc. An occasion where we use sets everyday is shopping, for an automated shopping list the objects are split into items on the self, items picked up and to be picked up.
Another example would be a computer game of pool. The ball in the game would be split into sets of balls on the table; balls potted and on the table and could be split further into dots/stripes.