Symbiosis is often defined as 'an ecological relationship between organisms of different species that are in direct contact' (Cambell and Reece 2005, p545). The organisms in the relationship are referred to as the host (the larger) and the symbiont (the smaller). There is a spectrum of symbiosis: Commensalism -where only one of the organisms benefits but does not harm the other to any significance, Mutualism -where both symbionts benefit, and finally Parasitism -only one organism (here called the parasite) benefits from the relationship but at the detriment of the host. However such terms are difficult to define and measure, and instigate questions such as 'what reasons are there for considering predator-prey and herbivore-crop relationships to be different from associations given names like parasitism, symbiosis and commensalism?' (Whitfield 1979, p1). Exploitation of the host environment is very similar to the exploitation of any other environment, however, it may be distinguished by the host environment's ability to respond adaptively to the presence of the parasite. (Wakefield 1984)
Parasites can be harmful to their host in a variety of ways, including lowering the fitness of the host by draining it of energy and feeding from its tissues and introducing pathogens to the host causing disease, as in the case of the Anopheles mosquitoes and the apicomplexan Plasmodium which causes the human disease 'Malaria'. (Cambell and Reece 2005)
Most of the organisms dealt with by Marquardt and Demaree (Parasitology 1985) are obligate parasites, which need a host for the completion of their life cycles. Although there are some parasites, referred to as facultative parasites that can easily remain free-living but take advantage of hosts if/when the opportunity arises.
Parasites can be divided into two groups:
Ectoparasites, which live outside the skin/feed on the external surface of the host i.e. suck blood, feed upon hair, feathers, skin or its secretions. They have biological and morphological adaptations to help them do this, e.g. enzymes suited to feeding on blood, similar body temp to host. The life cycle involves transmission/ dispersal stages and it may be synchronised with the host. Ticks are an example of ectoparasites.
Endoparasites, which live under the skin/within the body of the host: there are ranges of organisms both prokaryotic and eukaryotic that survive in this way. They have evolved many times - not necessarily from ectosymbionts- and live a wide variety of tissues. Examples of endosymbionts include viruses, bacteria, plasmodium (malaria), schistosoma (causes schistosomiosis) and tape worms (worm eggs cause problems).
Some insects (usually small wasps) lay eggs in or on their host's surface. The larvae then go on to feed on the living host, eventually killing it. This type of parasitism is called 'Parasitoidism', described by Campbell and Reece (2005).
The life cycle of the parasite involves transmission and dispersal stages and it may be synchronised with the life cycle of the host.
There may be a direct cycle during which the parasite is never exposed to the outside environment. The parasite may reproduce and have an infective stage in the host, which may be preyed upon and eaten. The parasite can then be transmitted to the new host as it is released by digestion, e.g. Trichinella spiralis (Nematoda).
Another possible cycle taken by the parasite whilst still not exposed to the outside is the use of a vector. This is a more indirect cycle and an example of this can be seen in the life cycle of Plasmodium (Protozoa) where it is transferred between humans by the Anopheles mosquitoes. Here, the vector takes up infective stages of the parasite during feeding on the host, these stages develop in the vector until it feeds on a new host, where the parasite can then be transmitted.
Other parasites may be exposed to the outside world by release of eggs but not as a free-living agent and develop and become transmitted directly e.g. Toxoplasma, or indirectly by an intermediate host e.g. tapeworms.
A free-living stage may be seen in the life cycles of hookworms or Schistosoma where parasitic eggs hatch and develop in outside world and may be transmitted to final host directly or indirectly by ingestion/penetration of infective stages or the ingestion of the infective intermediate host.
(Wakelin 1984)
Transmission between different species can sometimes be seen, as the closeness of the bond between parasites and their hosts is varies considerably. Some parasites are limited to a single species e.g. Taenia saginata, whilst others are very random e.g. Schiztotrypanum cruzi.
Parasites are not free-living, and this disadvantages them in their ability to adapt themselves to different environments. This is due to any change being significantly different to the previous factor as there are very few intermediates when entering a new host, in comparison to the adaptive potentials of a free-living organism. For example, a song sparrow can experience a huge number of intergrading conditions between the damp, cool forests of the northwest and the dry hot deserts of the southwest while an Ascaris sees no intermediate conditions between the conditions of a pig intestine and that of a human. Therefore any changes must be carried out in one jump, or not at all. This case also gives example of how sometimes inherent host characteristics are of little importance as the parasite's priority is more inclined to the hosts similar environmental conditions brought about due to shared habits or diets, and adaptation to phylogenetically unrelated hosts can be observed.
(Chandler and Read 1961).
There is an interesting and continually evolving relationship that can be seen between the parasite and the host, as both develop immunity against each other and the defences raised. As many of the parasites introduce microbes which bring about disease and infection of tissues animals have both natural and acquired immunity to resist this.