Free indirect discourse or This is achieved by combining grammatical and other features of the character's 'direct speech' with features of the narrator's 'indirect' report. It is a technique to allow the reader to interpret the protagonist's thoughts as the author enjoys a seemingly objective stance. Gustave Flaubert was a 'pioneer' One advantage he enjoyed was that it enabled him to find a style 'suitable to each object, each place, each circumstance [and] each being' This
The reader is often told how things are seen rather than merely what is being seen. One example of this is Charles' description of Emma as he frequents Rouault's farm; she offers him a drink. Flaubert uses The description is, ergo, extremely detailed and it is clear that it portrays the thoughts of Monsieur Bovary. He sees Emma: '[ Flaubert manages to describe Emma in a highly suggestive way and yet manages to keep the semblance of objectivity through the '
This Flaubert, however, ensures his rigid objectivity as, later on in the novel, the reader will be able to judge Emma's character for himself when the The reader will see her dissatisfaction with her life and especially with Charles but 'Flaubert's '  It is evident that it is not the author who is making this comment but it is in Emma's thoughts. By adopting This technique also enables Flaubert to ensure that the text is impersonal while simultaneously conveying judgments of characters and events; as 'impersonality depends not on what is said but on the fact that no identifiable narrator speaks.'
 It is often impossible to tell who actually is speaking as the 'speaker may be the narrator, or one of the characters, or both, or neither." We can see this in incidents where the distinction between character and narrator appears to disappear completely; ' It is impossible to tell here whether the narrator is quoting Emma's thoughts or feelings or whether he is, in fact, expressing his own opinions. Secondly, this intermittent use of 'absent' narration creates an illusion of objectivity and detachment by pushing the character into the foreground as the narrator recedes into the background. Due to the fact that the source of the narration is indistinguishable and that there are not multiple narrators, nor does the narrator have 'a distinct set of characteristics' The sequential effect is one which underlines the authenticity and objectivity of the text.
This Through We only see the characters through what they notice of each other through what they perceive of each other. Another example of this is where Emma's beauty as she lies in the hotel bed is appreciated by both L ' Emma's eyes are such incongruities; 'on one occasion he gives Emma brown eyes; on another deep black eyes; and, on another, blue eyes. L
Through his use of This form of statement allows a third-person narrative to exploit a first person point of view thus facilitating a multifaceted presentation of character, allowing the possibility of both ironic and empathetic attitudes. One example of Flaubert's use of Un amant! ' However, the passage which follows is in '
In conclusion Flaubert uses The style is also used to highlight the irony that is to be found in the text and to subtly control the reader and his reading of the text.