Ice cream is a complicated physiochemical system-colloidal system. Air cells are dispersed in a continuous liquid phase with embedded ice crystals. The liquid phase also contains solidified fat globules, milk proteins, insoluble salts, lactose crystals in some cases, stabilizers of colloidal dimension, sugars and soluble salts in solution. The finished product consists of liquid, air and solid, giving a three phase system. A typical ice cream contains about 30% ice, 50% air, 5% fat and 15% matrix (sugar solution) by volume. The ingredients of ice cream may be classified in three groups:
Cow's milk contains about 87% water. The remainder consists of fat (4%), proteins (3.5%), lactose (4.8%) and small quantities of inorganic salts. Basically, milk contains two main types of protein: casein (80%) and whey proteins (20%). Casein and whey proteins are distinguished by their differing solubility at pH 4.6 (at 20C), caseins are insoluble, whereas whey proteins are soluble (Clark, 2004).
Most of the casein proteins are present as colloidal particles, known as casein micelles (Swaisgood, 1992). Caseins are phosphoproteins. The phosphate groups are responsible for many of the important characteristics of casein, especially its ability to bind relatively large amounts of calcium, making it a very nutritionally valuable protein. All caseins have a high content (35-45%) of apolar amino acids (Val, Leu, Ile, Phe, Tyr, Pro) and would be expected to be poorly soluble in aqueous system. However, a high content of phosphate groups, low level of sulphur containing amino acids, and high carbohydrate content in the case of -casein, offset the influence of apolar amino acids. Caseins are quite stable to heat denaturation, but can be denatured by excessive heat, leading to aggregation and precipitation. As caseins are very surface active, and make good emulsifiers. Also, casein's high water binding capacity creates high viscosity in casein solutions. Consequently, casein has desirable functional properties for incorporating into instant desserts (Fox & McSweeney, 1998).
Whey protein contains two well-defined groups, which could be fractionated by saturated MgSO 4 or half-saturated NH 4SO 4; the precipitate (roughly 20% of the total nitrogen) was called a lactoglobulin and the soluble protein was lactalbumin (Fox & McSweeney, 1998). The major advantage of whey protein's application in food industry is its nutritional quality. The main whey product developed-to-date is probably whey protein concentrate (WPC). Commercially available WPCs contain from 35% to 95% protein, 6-10% lactose, 4-6% fat, 3-5% ash and 3-4% moisture. The functions of WPCs in food products can be related to the functionality of their proteins. Interactions between proteins and other molecules within a food system are necessary for a protein to manifest its functionality (Zadow, 1992). The five tables below represent a more detailed review of the composition and functionalities of whey protein in ice cream and other food systems, and also possible modifications on whey proteins during food processing.
Stabilizers are used in such small amounts as to have a negligible influence on food value, but will modify the physical and sensory properties of ice cream. For instance by:
Whey protein concentrate plays a significant role in ice cream, as it introduces various impacts on both physiochemical and sensory properties of ice cream by its intrinsic characteristics and also through interactions with other ingredients in the colloidal system.