As a farm manager I have to take on many different roles, I must plan, organise, lead, control and be responsible for the future of my farm. That in turn leads me to be responsible for the future of my workforce, to a certain extent. That puts a lot of pressure on me to make the right decisions.
There are three main types of skills involved in management and these go as follows:-
In other industries there are many different classes of management, but in my position of farm manager I am a general manager. I have more than one focus as I have to manage, implement and achieve goals.
According to Mintzberg, 1973, a manager fulfils informational, interpersonal and decisional roles. These roles are all part of the tasks that a manager should complete, but often one role will help to complete more than one task.
There are three main levels of environment I, as the farm manager must study in order to achieve a successful business and these are the General environment, the Task environment and the Internal environment. By devoting a large amount of attention to the Internal environment I will achieve immediate success with the business, however, to provide the farm with a long term future I must also closely study the General and Task environments to see how the farm can compete and improve its position in the market.
In order for the farm business to be successful, I must analyse the business in its current state regularly to identify its strengths and weaknesses. This then allows me to set realistic targets for the business which will produce the most beneficial results. The setting of targets involves a complicated process of studying, planning and organisation and the success of this relies on good strategic management.
As the farm manager I am automatically the leader for my employees. Leadership will always involve a certain aspect of Machiavellianism, for a leader must manipulate others slightly for personal gain, as this maximises the profit of their business. Manipulation can take various forms, but the most effective manipulation of employees must result in an increase in their motivation to work. Motivational skills are one of the essential possessions of a good leader, along with an aptitude for communication and the ability to encourage teamwork. I personally find the use of motivational skills to be very important in my industry, as to get the best out of employees, they have to want to fulfil the task set. In order to improve my own personal motivational skills I found it useful to study various existing motivational theories.
As the farm manager it is important that I take full control of the farm accounts and employ a full analysis, as this is yet another area in which I can discover new methods of making the farm more efficient. Although I may already have suspicions over which areas of my business are leading to profit and which are losing money, a thorough financial analysis allows me to accurately determine which areas these may be and I can then make changes to my business to either continue efficiency, or improve it. I require both a financial and a budgetary analysis to identify the areas that need change and then calculate how this could be achieved. The financial analysis is the first step in this process.
A farm business is possibly not the easiest business to apply management theories to, for it is ever changing and no two jobs are ever the same. That is why it is of high importance that I review my management strategy frequently and that it remains flexible in the mean time to allow for these alterations.
Although I am the farm manager, I find that there are many situations where I value the opinion of my employees. All three of my employees have worked for me for such a long period of time that I believe that in some cases they know more than me about the land and the livestock that they are working with. This is mainly a result of the increase in paperwork that has meant I now spend more time in the office than I do in the field. However, this has meant that I now feel able to participate in a more consultative management style and I think that this has benefited the team.
Currently there are many farmers leaving agriculture. One main reason for this is their inability to keep up with the changes in technology and consumer demand. To me, conducting a SWOT analysis is of particular importance because of this. I am also glad that I take the time to look at the external environment of my business. Because of this I am able to keep abreast of the changes that occur and plan how I will my business to fit in around them. I am particularly pleased with the goal that I have set the farm business to achieve, as I feel that it is attainable and having studied the current trends in consumerism, I feel it should guarantee my business a place in the future agricultural market.
Although there are big management tasks that must be completed, such as the setting of annual targets, the small tasks are of equal importance. As manager I must support my team on a daily basis to ensure that they are motivated and to check that they are conducting tasks as I expect them too. For although I trust their judgement and their ability, I cannot afford to have any slight weaknesses in my business. Even if I had the resources to employ a separate farm manager, I don't know if I would wish to as I prefer to know myself, for sure how my business is working in terms of resources, production and competition. If the farm is working efficiently towards all three of these goals then I am employing good management.