Establishment of asymmetry and specification of cell fate in the C. elegans embryo are processes occurring at a very early stage of embryogenesis. Maternal effect genes play a predominant role in initiating asymmetrical divisions and certain cell-cell interactions that influence cell fate, and mutations in these genes often have detrimental results concerning the embryonic phenotype. The functions and mechanisms of regulation of maternal effect genes have been extensively studied in the last two decades, mainly by investigating the effects of genetic modifications on young
The invertebrate It has several properties that made it very popular among developmental biologists as a model organism after being discovered as such by Sydney Brenner in the 1960s. Embryogenesis only takes 16 hours and can be accomplished in vitro. Furthermore the embryos are transparent, thus development can be monitored easily. Adults can be stored as frozen stocks and recover upon thawing. And because the species consists of few males and mostly hermaphrodites, one hermaphrodite individual can seed a whole population by self-fertilisation since it produces both sperm and eggs. Also, It can be easily genetically manipulated with techniques common in developmental biology to identify important genes.
Because Thus the origin of the 959 somatic cells within each adult organism is exactly known. Therefore,
Cell fate is specified by two processes very early on in embryogenesis. Firstly, a number of invariant asymmetric cell divisions, in which important regulatory molecules are being unequally distributed along the cleavage furrow, thus creating daughter blastomeres with different developmental fates. Secondly, there are different cell-cell interactions which have reproducible invariant patterns in every individual as well. In cell-cell interactions, a certain cell's signal will either alter the fate of an adjacent cell, or it will trigger polarisation of this cell, resulting in asymmetric division.
The majority of genes involved in early cell fate specification are maternal effect genes; so called because these genes are transcribed from the maternal genome and are delivered to the early embryo by its mother instead of being transcribed from the zygotic genome. And while the effects of mutations in these genes are not visible in the mother, the offspring will often have an easily distinguishable phenotype.
This essay focuses on a number of these genes and their protein products, as well as regulation of their expression. The first cell division of the P0 zygote is already asymmetrical, resulting in a bigger anterior founder cell called AB and a smaller posterior stem cell called P1. Each of the early cell divisions produces one somatic founder cell, denoted AB, EMS etc, and one stem cell, denoted P1 to P4, which is a germline precursor. The stem cell lineage always divides so at to produce another stem cell and a new anterior founder cell, as can be seen in fig. 1.:
There are two autonomous processes that take place at the one-cell stage, which are important in asymmetrical division. One is determination of the posterior pole of the P0 blastomere and the second concerns asymmetrical localisation of the PAR proteins, which are vital for maintaining the initially established asymmetry and cell fate specification of the daughter blastomeres AB and P1. One sign of asymmetry is the migration of P granules, which are ribonucleoprotein complexes involved in specifying the germline and are randomly dispersed throughout the cytoplasm at the early one-cell stage. The P granules can be found migrating to the posterior axis shortly after fertilisation, so that they enter only the P1 blastomere formed from the posterior cytoplasm.
A maternally contributed transcription factor, SKN-1, is required to specify the identity of EMS, thus also establishing the dorsoventral axis in the  Mutations in In addition,
Mutations in the maternal Thus
In the AB divides into two developmentally equivalent daughter cells, ABa and ABp, which have asymmetrical contacts with the neighbouring blastomeres EMS and P2. This enables a cell-cell interaction between ABp and P2 by the late 4-cell stage of embryogenesis that is essential for formation of a dorsoventral axis and causes ABp to adopt a different developmental fate from ABa.
A lot of research has been done in order to understand the mechanisms that establish asymmetry and specify cell fate in the early The major conclusion the processes are achieved via arises through a combination of asymmetric cell divisions and cell-cell interactions. It has been found that a whole range of maternal effect genes play a vital role in early embryogenesis but it is not clear in all cases exactly how the maternal information acts on the expression of zygotic genes and in which way these genes participate in the processes described. Further analysis of zygotic gene mutations is needed to elucidate this. Furthermore, there remain several gaps in our knowledge about how the various maternal factors interact with one another. The spatial and temporal regulation of expression of any given maternal effect gene often seems to be dependant on a number of other maternal effect gene products, so it should be interesting to shed light on the connections between regulation of different maternal genes in different stages of early embryogenesis.