The aim of this experiment was to run a series of set measured tests on a 3-phase induction motor in order to understand its properties both as a motor and as a generator under both grid-connected and stand-alone environments. Measurements such as Voltages, Currents and Motor Rotation speeds were taken in order to calculate the various parameters of component reactance's and efficiency curves. This allowed us to deduce which circuit configuration would be best suited to be used in both a stand-alone and grid-connected generating environment.
Details regarding how induction generators work, the equipment used within the test and a list of aims and equations used are given in the accompanying lab sheet (1) in the Appendix.
The circuit for this test was the same as that seen in The line voltage was set back down to zero to ensure motor had stopped. The rotor shaft fan was locked with a screwdriver, and then the line voltage was turned up slowly until the current matched the motors rated full-load current of 3A.
So.....
Most of the 3.3Amp current was flowing through the rotor circuit. This was because the rotor was locked and not free to react to the rotating magnetic flux in the stator, so the flux induced current flow in the rotor circuit. The Voltage supplied to the motor was 55V. This measured Voltage is much reduced from the normal (rated) operating voltage of 220V at 3Amps. The line voltage (Potential difference) dropped significantly during the test because a large majority of the current energy flowing through the stator coils was not being used to rotate the rotor via the rotor inductors cutting the stator coils flux. So the potential difference (V
The circuit was connected to the 3-phase 50Hz grid supply as shown in The supply voltage to the motor was set to 220V allowing the motor to rotate at no load. Two water pumps were turned on and valves opened to allow an increasing water flow to hit the 'Turgo' turbine attached to the spinning rotor. As the water pressure was increased, the water pressure, line voltage, current, electric power and motor speed were measured. The results can be seen in
 This could be due to either some electrical circuit losses, the turbine causing drag slowing the rotor speed, or the motor being rated to run at 1500rpm at 240V (we are running at 220V). As the water pressure increased on the turbine, this induced more torque power to the rotor giving more electric power in watts per phase. At a water pressure of 10psi the total power in watts was decreasing as the motor started to generate power due to the increasing torque on the rotor from the water pressure reacting on the turbine. Above water pressures of 10 to 15psi the motor stopped acting as a motor and generated an output measured on the Wattmeter's in negative total Watts. This was because the power (electrical energy) had changed flow direction within the circuit.  When the motor started to generate power to the grid and act as a generator, the output power became negative.
 When the water pressure was above 10 to 15psi causing the rotor turbine to rotate at higher speeds above the grid synchronised (and rated) speed of 1500rpm, the current output increased to 3.1 at 1560rpm. This was because the motor was generating power above 1500rpm. This is motor was now generating in a '
By using our results data in There were many losses between the water pressure meter and the water hitting the turbine such as pipe length causing flow restriction, valves, pipe couplings etc. We assumed a total loss of energy between the meter and the turbine of approx 30%
As induction motors do not have any internal source of magnetism except for a little residual magnetism, capacitors have to be used to 'excite' the machine in order to generate power in a stand-alone system. Capacitors can absorb the residual magnetic leakage flux from the stator coils when the motor was last running. Capacitors can store this energy as When the rotor is turned by means of a turbine via input energy from hydro power for example, the voltage released by the capacitors flows through the exciter circuit and this helps to kick start the current flow in the coils to generate an output.
To calculate the capacitor size required for this motor we use the following equation:
(Using Q total value calculated from the
So using 18 microfarads capacitors are more than adequate as they will not become fully charged or electrically overloaded in the case of using capacitors of less than 15 microfarads.
Theoretical frequency at which our generator should operate at = 63.6 Hz
Method:
 Here we can see the three capacitors wired in delta across the stator coils in the motor. Instead of being connected to the grid supply, the motor is connected to a 3-phase load, this was just load resistor bank connected in 'Delta' configuration inside a 'black box'.
Each time we increased the load we increased the water pressure accordingly until the output line voltage read 220V, then took readings of the current, voltage, power, water pressure and generator (motor) speed The voltage was raised to 220V to simulate the voltage of the grid, as any consumers effectively connected to this system would require a 220V supply.
Our results as seen in As the load required increases so the hydropower water pressure to the turbine needs to increase in order to speed up the generator to generate more power output.
The computer simulated Machine Efficiency/speed graph ( So increasing and decreasing the generator speed according to load demand is a very inefficient way of generating a power supply ( If the load demand were to suddenly fall (by consumers switching electrical items off), this system would become very unstable as the turbine would still be spinning the rotor at 1716rpm and the electrical power produced would have no where to go.... As this stand alone system is not connected to the grid OR have any means with which to 'offload' excess power, this could seriously damage the equipment!
Single-phase operation is possible by attaching a single-phase load across two phases of the Induction motor and the capacitors.
As discussed before in
Advantages (if the water flow and power electronics regulations were automated):
System would be fairly rugged and robust as the only moving parts would be the turbine rotor shaft and a few valves therefore low maintenance.
System would be relatively cheap to install and once installed have few operating costs.
The system is running in stable operating conditions no matter what the load requirement is. The generator is continuously running at 1580rpm, which according to the Machine efficiency/speed curve is the most efficient speed for this motor to run at.
The system is relatively efficient if either all the electrical power being generated is being used by consumers, OR if not, the heat produced due to excess load being dissipated into the ballast resister bank is utilised for example to heat consumers homes. If this waste heat is not utilised then the ballast resistor bank contributes the greatest inefficiency to the whole system.
Disadvantages:
Loads would be strictly limited to the power output of the generator.
If the system were to maximise energy generated by the 3-phases, careful monitoring of load balances between the 3 phases would be required.
Energy not used by the load would be lost into the resistor banks, though this energy could be put to good use - for example running either power station system or domestic heating water through heat exchangers in the resistor banks to heat it up for required usage. Energy could also be diverted into either batteries, or to generate hydrogen to store energy via the electrolysis of water.
If the single generator failed the system would go down. The system would either need to have two generators running simultaneously so that one could continue (at a reduced total output) whilst the failed generator was being fixed, or be able to switch the load supply over to the grid network in the event of a failure.
In the case of a non self-regulating system, someone would have to be paid to oversee supply and demand by operating machine and electronic controls.
The stability of the system voltage and output would be threatened if there were a problem with the water flow.