The 'Experiencing the Weather' field course took place during the weekend of 28 th - 29 th October 2006. It was based at Leeson House field studies centre at Langton Matravers, Dorset:
The weekend's activities included:
Please note that there is also some automatically recorded data in the days preceding the period from the mast at Durlston Head.
This report aims to both describe and explain the observed weather during the period 27 th to 29 th October 2006. It should link together observations from different sources to provide a coherent picture of the weather's evolution during this time.
During the early hours of Sunday morning, a cold front passed over the region. This is the more northerly front lying across the South coast in figure 3 (A1). It is a trailing cold front from a developed cyclone, which moved in from the West during the previous days. The passage of the front was observed as a sharp dip followed by a rise in pressure, recorded at 0230UTC at Leeson House observatory (figure 15, AD). The temperature also started to fall at approximately this time, suggesting a cooler air mass may have moved into the region (figure 15, AD). 2.5mm of rain also fell at Leeson House although the time is unknown. This is unlikely to be a local effect as rain was recorded at Bournemouth between 0000 and 0600UTC. A sharp change in wind direction was recorded at Durlston Head at approximately 0230UTC (figure 13 AC), this is consistent with the passage of a cold front. There is also a sharp dip in the potential gradient at this time (figure 10, AC). However as rain drops are negatively charged, the potential gradient should have dropped below zero if it had rained at Durlston Head. Therefore this is an indication that it might have been a weak front or that it didn't rain at Durlston Head.
Saturday was characterised with warm moist air that was advected from the South West. This caused mild temperatures, high relative humidities and low visibilities. A warm front passed through the area at approximately 1400UTC. The polar jet stream was also strong and characterised by distinctive high level cirrus formations.
Sunday had much clearer stable conditions due to an anticyclone building over Western Europe and a cold front passing through the region early Sunday morning. This led to reduced cloud and excellent visibilities. The front stayed over the English Channel before eventually becoming suppressed by the anticyclone.