The optimum position for a 'Monocrystalline' type PV installation at your Reading Primary School installed on a tilted canopy roof with an area of 8m x 5m (40m -2) would be when PV modules are orientated at 30 degrees from the Horizontal and facing directly South (Azimuth bearing of 0 degrees South). (See Fig.1 below)
Here are two different types of PV technology. Although both types use Silicon wafers, they have physical, efficiency and most importantly price differences.
There are a number of funding sources available to schools interested in installing renewable energy technologies.
The Department of Trade and Industry could provide government funding through their 'Low Carbon Buildings Programme'. Grants will be up to a maximum of 30,000 or 50% of the capital and installation cost of the micro generation technologies installed. These grants will be awarded on a rolling first-come-first-served basis. Details of how to apply can be found through their website:  (5)
More details of other sources of funding can be found on .pdf pages available through the Dti website at  (3)
A tree stands 4m high and 2m in front (south of) the proposed canopy roof. At different times of the day throughout the year the sun will cast a shadow of the tree onto the PV system installed on the proposed canopy roof. On most days this particular tree location forms shadows across the roof starting around midday and then on throughout the afternoon.
Winter time. The sun arcs low in the sky at just 15 degrees above the horizon at midday. This low sun will cast long shadows of the tree trunk upon the roof throughout the afternoon. This time of year the PV will the receiving mostly diffuse light due to likely cloud cover and less direct sunlight. Shadows will make little difference to low energy output levels.
Autumn/Spring time. The sun arcs across the sky at 40 degrees above the horizon at midday. This will cause a greater % of decreased power output due to the bulk of the tree causing a large shadow which could cover up to one third of the roof.
Summer time around midday. The sun arcs high in the sky at 60 degrees above the horizon. From this position the sun forms less of a shadow, which covers a smaller % of the roof. The suns irradiance is at its greatest this time of day and year so the shadow should not make a great deal of difference in power output.
Summer time mid afternoon. During the afternoon the shadow increases and is at its greatest around 3pm after which the shadow lessens in size. The output at this time will be affected more than the shadows position at midday.
The total annual energy loss due to shading from this tree will be 273kWh.
The total annual energy output with shading from this tree will be 3353kWh
The system output predicted using RETscreen software suggests that at a London location using mono-silicon PV at a nominal rated output of 4.6kWh we could generate 3904kWh. This is 280kWh more than PVSYST, though to be fair we cannot directly compare, as we cannot choose the same modules or inverter in RETscreen as in PVSYST.
PVSYST is a comprehensive PV project design package that has lots of potential. It has great graphical representations of sun path diagrams, data histograms, energy losses. It has the ability to design and view your systems orientation with nearby shading objects such as trees and buildings in 3-D. The data from these shading factors can then be seen to affect your PV systems power output. The software is by no means perfect and could be further improved by addition of more features and better navigation throughout pages. One annoyance is the fact you can only specify your array size in the 'Preliminary' and not the 'Project' sections of the software. This would be immensely helpful when choosing your module types, numbers of and hence size of area taken up by modules.
RETscreen is based on Microsoft excel spreadsheets and is therefore a case of plug in your values and see how this affects the final values. The spreadsheet trends to over calculate your power output compared to PVSYST even though it assumes some losses. You are unable to enter the PV area required in m 2, only the nominal PV array power that then automatically predicts the array area in m 2. There is less choice in PV module manufacturers to choose from. You cannot choose a specific inverter, only the number of inverters but it does allow you to enter the inverter efficiency if you are lucky enough to know it. RETscreen feels and looks more like a 'system costs model' for business, rather than a piece of software designed specifically for PV design such as PVSYST. RETscreen lacks any graphical representations of data or design, and lacks the broader overall features of PVSYST. The only real advantage of RETscreen over PVSYST is that the software is free!