Different packaging films have different functions due to the properties of packaging materials are varied. In the practical, we intended to research the differences between the films provided by using simple tests and observing the changes of the samples wrapped by different packaging materials during 7 days.
Introduction:
Anon (1988) stated "the packaging as the enclosure of products, items or packages in a wrapped pouch, bag, box, cup, tray, can, tube, bottle or other container form to perform one or more of the following functions: containment, protection and/ or preservation, communication and utility or performance".
Packaging provides a barrier between the food and the environment. And it control light transmission, the transfer of heat, moisture and gases, and movement of microorganisms or insects (Fellows, 1988). Light transmission is employed in packages that are intended to display the contents and provide a platform for labeling. But the light transmission is restricted when foods are susceptible to deterioration by light, such as the oxidation of lipids, loss of color and denaturation of protein. For example low-density polyethylene (LDPE) transmits both visible and ultraviolet light, polyvinylidene chloride transmit visible light but absorb UV light. Packaging should also have certain level of heat resistance, especially when packaging hot food then package shrinking may occur. The permeability of the packaging material to gases and moisture and the packaging procedures employed can influence the type of microorganisms that grow within the package. For fresh food, such as fruit, vegetable and meat, which still respire after harvesting, the water vapor may condense inside the packages if the existed water can not be vapor out of the package that may lead spoilage occur. At the same time, the gases produced by content such as the carbon dioxide, ethylene, have double-side influences. On one hand, the high density of carbon dioxide in the package that can limit the microorganisms growth to achieve the extend shelf-life, on the other hand, the gases may deteriorate or over harvested the food. By researching, the water existing in the package may occur interaction with the certain film and generate hazard compounds when the environment of outside have changed, such the high temperature, high moisture. So the consideration of what kind of materials can run the job for individual food should be prior to the packaging. Another essential property of film is mechanical strength which is the ability of packages to protect foods from mechanical damage had been measured in this practical. The factor of material mechanical strength is influenced by the temperature of material and the length of time that the force is applied (Briston, 1974).
The materials of package are varied. In this practical, we chose paper, regenerated cellulose 350 MS, regenerated cellulose 340 D.M.S, polyethylene, polypropylene, aluminium foil and Cryovac S film whose permeability of water vapor, violate compound and the tensile strength had been tested.
Paper almost used for food packaging is made from wood. Some papers are made from repulped waster paper which increases the incident of contamination of microbes and the paper may give off odors which are likely to cause tainting of the contents (Brennan, 2006). In food manufactory, the coated papers are more commonly used. For example, aluminium coated paper enhance the barrier property of water vapor and gases.
Regenerated cellulose (cellophane) differs from the polymer films in that it is made from wood pulp. It can provides general protect against dust and dirt, some mechanical protection and is greaseproof. When the environment is dry it is a good barrier to gases, but becomes highly permeable when wet. The codes are used to reflect the property of regenerated cellulose films:
D: coated on one side only;
M: moistureproof;
S: heat-sealable;
DMS: nitrocellulose-coated on one side only (Brennan, 2006).
Polyethylene (PE) commonly called polythene which can be divided into LDPE, MDPE and HDPE with different density. LDPE have most widely used in the food packaging due to its strength, low permeability to water vapor and it forms a very strong heat seal. But it is not good barrier to gases oils and volatiles (Brennan, 2006).
Polypropylene is a clear glossy film with good optical properties and a high tensile strength and puncture resistance. It has moderate permeability to moisture, gases and odors, which is not affected by the changes in humidity ((Fellows, 1988).
Aluminium foil is in a good appearance, dead-folding and the ability to reflect radiant energy and an excellent barrier to moisture and gases.
Cryovac S film: Cryovac feature a full range of barrier properties and toughness to meet each product requirements, with added value features such as easy-opening on transversal or end seals, plain, pigmented or printed, taped, non-tapped or roll stock, others provide controlled permeability rates. Value added features, such as easy-opening and re-closing systems, are also available (Sealed Air, 2007).