A platinum film thermometer and a thermistor thermometer were calibrated over the range 0 The sensitivity and resolution of each instrument was calculated and these were used to compare the instruments. Recommendations are made as to the suitability of these instruments for meteorological applications.
Thermometry involves measuring and quantifying the temperature of a medium. Thermometers are based upon the principle of measuring a known physical quantity that varies with temperature. Resistance thermometers measure the change in electrical resistance of an electrical conductor. The relationship between resistance and temperature can be mathematically quantified. Thus, if the resistance of a given material is known, the temperature can be calculated (DeFelice, 1998; Met Office, 1981; Strangeways, 2003).
Many metals exhibit such behaviour, for example nickel, iron and copper. Platinum is commonly used in resistance thermometers owing to its ability to maintain its characteristics over a long period, resistance to corrosion and relative linearity in response. These factors help minimise deterioration in the instruments' performance over time and allow for a simple calculation to determine temperature from the recorded resistance (Met Office, 1981; Strangeways, 2003).
The response characteristic of platinum resistance thermometers is accurately approximated by
where R is resistance ( Over the atmospheric range of temperature, the quadratic term in equation (1) is much smaller than the linear term. Therefore, an accurate meteorological approximation to the characteristic is given by
where R is resistance (
Thermistors are an alternative type of resistance thermometer. These are semiconductor resistors that display a larger change in resistance with temperature than metals. This change in resistance may be either positive or negative. Thermistor sensors can be engineered to be very small, thus lowering the thermal capacity and time-constant. The characteristic of thermistors can be expressed as
where R is thermistor resistance ( It should be noted that this is not a perfect fit and that the error may be up to 5% of the actual resistance. It follows that this equation may be simplified to give the linear relationship
(DeFelice, 1998; Met Office, 1981; Strangeways, 2003).
This paper describes the calibration of a platinum film resistance thermometer and a thermistor thermometer over the range 0 The values of all constants in equations 1 to 4 will be determined for the instruments used, and the calibration errors quantified. The characteristics of the instruments will then be compared.
The platinum film resistance thermometer (PFT) and thermistor thermometer were immersed in a thermostatically controlled water bath. A precision platinum resistance thermometer was also immersed in the bath, and was used to record the 'actual' temperature of the water, required for calibrating the other two thermometers.
The PFT and thermistor thermometer were each connected to individual multi-meters, which displayed the resistance of the respective instruments. The resolutions of the multi-meters differed, with the meter connected to the platinum film thermometer having a resolution of 0.001
The temperature of the water bath was raised from 0 Resistance was recorded for the PFT and thermistor thermometer when the precision thermometer indicated that the water temperature was relatively stable (i.e. varying by only approximately 0.01 Resistance readings were taken simultaneously for both thermometers so as to avoid errors arising from differing lag characteristics
The results arising from the experiment are shown in Appendix 1.
The calibration of the platinum film thermometer and thermistor allowed the relationships between temperature and resistance to be quantified for each instrument. These were:
Investigation of the linear relationship for the platinum film thermometer revealed that the use of a quadratic equation (R = -5x10 The improvement in the range of accuracy was shown to be in the order of 0.01 Whilst this is likely to be of minimal importance for most atmospheric applications, it may be of use in high-precision thermometry and therefore should be noted.
Both thermometers were shown to have a high sensitivity relative to the resolutions of the digital meters used to measure resistance. Thus either instrument will respond to a small change in environmental temperature with a detectable change in the resistance of the sensor. It should be noted that in the case of the thermistor, the sensitivity of the instrument is not constant, and actually deteriorates with increasing temperature as a result of the response characteristic. However, the sensitivity is still sufficiently high at 30
The resolution of each thermometer was also calculated, assuming that instrument resolution was only limited by that of the multi-meter used in the calibration. The thermistor displayed the highest resolution, although this also deteriorated at higher temperatures, tending towards the constant resolution of the platinum film thermometer.
A brief investigation of the measured temperature uncertainty related to a known resistance uncertainty was undertaken. This revealed that the platinum film thermometer had a smaller temperature uncertainty than the thermistor. The platinum film thermometer also had lower calibration errors than the thermistor.
Overall, it would therefore be more desirable to use the platinum film thermometer for meteorological measurements. This instrument has a relatively accurate linear relationship between resistance and temperature, which can be improved upon by use of a quadratic relationship if necessary. Other aspects of the platinum film thermometer are relatively constant, such as the sensitivity and resistance, and show little reliance on temperature (in the quadratic case), or none (in the linear case), unlike the thermistor, for which these characteristics decline with increasing temperature. Also, smaller calibration errors associated with the platinum film thermometer mean that more accurate results are likely when compared with the thermistor.
It would be wise to repeat this calibration experiment over several runs so as to determine the typical responses of each instrument. Also recommended for future investigation is an increase of the experimental temperature range so as to determine the operating ranges of each instrument and if either instrument demonstrates better accuracy than the other within certain temperature ranges.