A computer model was used to characterise the evolution of urban and rural boundary layers. Physical mechanisms are proposed for the observed boundary layer evolutions. Vertical distribution of a pollutant was also calculated for each environment, and links with boundary layer evolution suggested. The practical implications of the findings are considered.
This practical shall investigate the diurnal evolution of the atmospheric boundary layer and the vertical distribution of a pollutant emitted at a constant rate from the surface within the boundary layer. The boundary layer is simulated using a 1D computer model driven by surface sensible heat fluxes and geostrophic winds. The model calculates vertical profiles of potential temperature ( These outputs are displayed on a series of graphs, some of which shall be used within this report. It is also possible for the user to vary certain non-meteorological physical parameters such as roughness length, latitude, and pollutant lifetime.
Within this investigation, most of the parameters shall remain constant. Appendix 1 shows those parameters used to define a rural environment. Alterations to any of these parameters will be explicitly noted within the text of the report.
The model used within this study shows that the boundary layer of an urban area is generally deeper than that of a rural area in similar synoptic conditions. This finding is consistent for both daytime and nocturnal boundary layers. This effect is believed to arise as a result of the larger sensible heat fluxes and greater surface roughness that characterises urban areas.
The diurnal evolution of vertical pollution mixing profiles was also shown to differ between urban and rural environments. Concentrations tend to be higher in the shallower rural boundary layer. This effect is especially pronounced in the rural nocturnal boundary layer due to this being significantly shallower than the urban nocturnal boundary layer.
These findings suggest that the urban boundary layer is more efficient than the rural boundary layer at vertically dispersing pollutants, given similar synoptic conditions pollution emission rate (and lifetime) and latitude in both cases. This will have health implications for those susceptible to the effects of pollutants, and suggests that urban residence may be more beneficial than rural residence if health were the only factor under consideration. These findings may also be of interest to planners, suggesting that polluting industrial activities will have a lesser environmental impact in urban areas.
In order to evaluate these findings, it is recommended that pollution dispersion be examined in a 3-dimensional model under a range of synoptic conditions. This would result in a more accurate representation of reality and would test the validity of these preliminary findings.