This assignment tried to predict the occurrence of the tremor in Parkinson's disease from the local field potentials (LFPs) recorded from sub-thalamus by using artificial neural networks. This may contribute to design a demand-driven intelligent stimulator. The data recorded from sub-thalamus was processed by using some statistic method before being trained by neural network. The experimental results show that it is possible to use neural networks to predict Parkinsonian tremor by using the LFPs recorded from sub-thalamic nucleus.
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by many forms of change in motor function known by neurological signs like tremor, muscle rigidity, bradykinesia, akinesia and loss of postural reflexes [1]. Such symptoms tend to be associated with basal ganglia, thalamus and motor cortex [1]. Parkinson's tremor is the most common form of resting tremor caused by idiopathic Parkinson's disease [2]. This tremor of Parkinson's disease is one of the involuntary movement disorders affecting many people, in particular, elderly. There are several possible therapies for Parkinson's disease. These approaches include L-Dopa, antioxidants, drugs which stimulate dopamine receptors, drugs which block glutamate, drugs which decrease apoptosis, neurotrophins, high-frequency electrical stimulation of the globus pallidus and transplants of neurons from a fetus, but such treatments have some limitations [3]. Patients usually have internal globus pallidus Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS) for surgical treatment [2]. Some patients are implanted a deep brain electrode into thalamus or sub-thalamus. Such treatments are less dangerous than lesioning, particularly subthalamic nucleus stimulation [4]. The cost of Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS), however, limits the number of patients using this to stimulate deep brain structure because of the frequent replacement of batteries [4]. Demand-driven Deep Brain Stimulation may be a solution to this problem. To achieve this, the occurrence of tremor must be predicted.
Artificial neural networks (ANNs), the field of artificial intelligence, emerge from the development of the first neural model by McCulloch and Pitts in the 1940s. Since then many researchers have become increasingly interested in artificial neural networks, commonly referred to as "neural networks" in [5]. There are many advantages of neural networks such as machine learning, generalization, adaptation and fault tolerance. Artificial neural network can be applied to medicine or biomedical engineering domain. The medical applications fall into four basic fields: modeling, bioelectric signal processing, classification for diagnosis and prediction for prognostics [6]. A lot of research shows that neural networks have been used successfully in many areas in prediction such as the prediction of ovarian cancer and also several types of cancer [7]. It is likely that neural networks might be utilised in the prediction of the occurrences of tremor in Parkinson's disease from sub-thalamic nucleus (STN) LFPs signal.
Table 1 illustrates the accuracy of each topology. As can be seen from this table, the topologies with 100 hidden neurons have the minimum values of MSE for both one and two hidden layers, which are 0.0118 and 0.0132 respectively. It is clear from Table 1 that the best topology seems to be 1-100-1 network.
Table 2 demonstrates the performance of both one and two hidden layers by the comparison between the 1-100-1 network and the 1-50-50-1 network. The MSE of 1-100-1 network is slightly different from 1-50-50-1 network.
Figure 4 and 5 illustrate the results of 1-50-50-1 network and 1-100-1 network respectively, compared with the target values. Generally, the results of both networks are almost the same although 1-100-1 network is more slightly accurate than 1-50-50-1 network. The 1-50-50-1 network almost reaches the target at the 15 th second, while the 1-100-1 network can achieve the target at this time. It seems that both networks predict the onset of Parkinsonian tremor at the 15 th second and again at the 44 th second.
Overall, it is more likely that the onset of the tremor in Parkinson's disease can be predicted by using artificial neural network and STN LFPs. It is evident that selecting the appropriate number of hidden neurons has a significant impact on the performance of training and generalisation. Moreover, it appears that an increase in the number of hidden layers can lead to a slight decrease in the accuracy of training and generalisation. As a result of this, the two hidden layers cannot improve significantly performance, compared to one hidden layer with the same number of hidden neurons.
Nevertheless, there may be some errors in experimental results for both networks. Poor training performance might be a major problem in this experiment. There is some possible reason for this problem. Initialisation of weights may cause such a problem if the magnitudes of weights are too large. Another problem probably occurs is poor generalisation performance. There are several possible reasons for this. Over-training may be the reason why generalisation performance on the test set is poor. This is because the noise on the training patterns might be learnt. Another cause of poor generalisation performance may be over-fitting. The possibly reason for this is that the neural network learns the detail of the training patterns and then fit the noise causing a decrease in the generalisation performance on the test data. A local minimum on the error surface might also cause poor generalisation performance. It is worth noting, however, that the other considered approaches can achieve a comparable, or even better, performance of training and generalisation after fine-tuning the values of the parameters including the number of hidden neurons, the number of hidden layer initial weights and some parameters in training algorithm.
This assignment presents the use of artificial neural network to predict the onset of the tremor in Parkinson's disease from the local field potentials (LFPs) recorded from sub-thalamus. MLP neural network was used for the prediction task. Based on these results, it seems generally clear that the MLP neural network using one hundred hidden neurons is more likely to predict the onset of Parkinsonian tremor, even though it is not more effective enough because of the existence of errors. The experimental results obtained suggest that the impact of the number of hidden neurons is significant for the performance of training and generalisation. Overall, selecting one hidden layer with approximately 100 hidden neurons including logistic activation function and being trained by a scaled conjugate gradient algorithm appear to be an appropriate choice for MLP neural network in this experiment.
In a future correspondence, alternative topologies need to be investigated, as well as the potential benefits from employing genetic algorithms [14], [15] for training neural networks along with an implementation of pruning the networks. Genetic algorithms have a better chance of finding a global optimum; hence, it can avoid local minima in the error surface. Network pruning techniques can eliminate unnecessary synaptic weights in a neural network. Such a technique is known as the Optimal Brain Surgeon (OBS) algorithm [16].