The 5 The collapse of the Roman Empire's power structure, in the 5 that attacked the Empire on every front. These invading groups were to be instrumental in the development of many of Europe's modern languages and borders, yet 'documentary evidence about even the most important people in early medieval society ... is at best sparse and frequently non-existent'. For example, in the Alemannic region of south west Germany, there are currently 'only a few fragmentarily excavated settlements', while vast numbers of graves with 'hundreds of thousands of grave goods' are available for study.
Much study has been devoted to the changes in burial ritual in different areas of Europe during the period, with the aim of inferring information on many topics, including social structures, population movement, and religious belief. This essay will examine the burial rites and discuss their usefulness in drawing conclusions about early medieval society.
There are a few British historical sources that comment on the period of confusion after the Romans abandoned the country, and hint at the situation in Europe. It seems that as early as the 3 Inconveniently for us, 'the end of roman Britain and the beginning of Anglo-Saxon England were not directly consecutive or datable events'. Gildas claims that soon eastern England was overrun by a threatening number of Saxons, who eventually banded together with the Picts. This seems to be the start of a period of Saxon dominance in Britain. While the document must be used carefully due to its 'demonstrable errors In conjunction with consideration of the archaeological evidence, it is likely to prove useful.
The political and cultural changes taking place in Europe are reflected in the differences between 4 In the years of the late empire, inhumation, sometimes with vessels, was the common Roman burial practice, with 'grave goods becoming increasingly rare' 5th century burials containing goods of similarly high status have been found in Britain, northern Gaul and southern Germany. Across Europe, furnished burials shared common orientation (west-east) and a lack of standardised grave shape. Appearing earliest in Gaul (in Roman cemeteries at first), such burials often included gender-specific goods, jewellery with women and weaponry with men. The type, style and distribution of these artefacts however varied by region. In Britain, the weapons buried were almost exclusively spears and shields, and generally more females were buried with goods than men. By contrast, in northern Gaul swords were favoured heavily, and there was a bias towards burying men with goods.
The influence that European societies had on Britons can be demonstrated by Lucy/Reynolds' observation that 'different areas of the country can be seen to adopt varying facets of a broadly north European/ Scandinavian burial practice..." The appearance in British graves of Scandinavian cruciform and square style brooches demonstrates communication between groups in different areas of Europe at this time. The influence these groups had on each other is implied by the fact that simultaneous to the adoption of lavish burials, urned cremations, (also with grave goods) like those in north east Germany were too being taken up again by Britons.
Early Anglo-Saxon burials were nothing if not varied, as demonstrated by evidence of other, more unusual burial practice dating to this period. Charring inside graves appears to indicate a process of 'half cremation'; 'a fire was lit in the grave before an inhumation took place', perhaps as a form of ritual purification. Reynolds and Lucy cite barrows such as Sutton Hoo as evidence of 'the increasing distance in ideological terms between ruler and subject'
The idea of multiple inhumations in the same grave however (there are repeated instances of double, even treble burials across the continent), did not appear to travel to Britain during this period.
The 'susceptibility to frequent change' This is generally attributed to the rise of Christianity, as it was known to have spread back to Britain by this time. Instead of barrows, crosses and even churches were adopted as above-ground burial markers. The burials were often located in churchyards, close to settlements in contrast to the earlier Anglo-Saxon burials in liminal areas, on boundaries between territories. Adoption of Christian views of the afterlife (that a person's body had to be in tact so it could be resurrected on the Day of Judgement), are almost certainly the reason for the abrupt discontinuation of cremation. Furnished burials seem to have been phased out more gradually, as goods were still appearing in 7th century 'final phase' Christian burials.
The 'significant ritual diversity' The 'group of low circular burial mounds' The largest of the mounds contained the remains of a huge ship, and a very wealthy assemblage of grave goods. Although not an especial source of burials with rich goods, Scandinavia is known for its 'lavish boat burials' (i.e. Valsgarde). A purse containing Merovingian Gaulish coins
This raises the thorny question of the ethnic descent of those buried at Sutton Hoo; can we perhaps conclude they were Germanic Saxons, influenced in their burial practices by those of other Europeans? Probably not, given that 'the idea that the artefact types themselves are significant in ethnic terms is one that is increasingly challenged." While Halsall, is absolutely certain that 'the introduction of cremation into lowland Britain was the result of migration from northern Germany', He suggests that ethnogenesis (the creation of 'new ethnic identities'
Evidence of influence from several areas of Europe is implied by the other burials of Sutton Hoo. Mounds 2, 3 and 4 contained, among other things, remains of cremated bones of humans and a horse; while a few horse burials exist from north Gaul, they were frequent in Germany, with animals buried too, like deer.
Finally, perhaps some religious significance can be inferred from the ship's burial assemblage, which has been described as containing '...possessions that reflected every aspect of his Yet inferring religious belief from funerary practices is never simple; spoons inscribed with 'Saul' and 'Paul', names with an 'ultimately Christian significance' Adding to the confusion is the consideration that while the spoons are 'probably symbolic of someone's conversion to Christianity'
This resurgence of certain funerary rituals in Britain, sometimes subsequent to such resurgences in other parts of Europe, combined with the common styles of artefact imply that Britain was being influenced heavily by outside communities, as covered above. Though it is certain that there was an influx of Saxons to Britain, it has been debated whether large-scale population movement in Europe was the cause of 'sudden and drastic That Y chromosomes from the current population of Central England were 'statistically indistinguishable' from samples from Friesia supports the idea of a mass-migration. It was the conclusion of those conducting the study that 'the Anglo-Saxon cultural transition in Central England coincided with a mass immigration from the continent'
5 The development/ readoption of a variety of rites after the end of Roman rule indicates the relative disorganisation of society, and the rise to power of separate groups in each region. Europe and Britain shared several 'new' burial rites different to those of the preceding period, from which we can infer both communication, and also significant migrations between different areas. That there were regional variations in the details of these rites also hints at a degree of individuality, and the future emergence of defined areas that would become the later states of medieval Europe.
The significant change in burial rites from the 7
However, our interpretations of the burial evidence from this period of population movement en masse, are somewhat limited by blurred lines of ethnicity. Without written records to define their (the Anglo-Saxons and other Europeans) definitions of ethnicity, we may never understand the significance of certain items found buried with human remains.