- Round worms are common sheep parasite which predominately effect lambs, but also older ewes
- There are several species of roundworm & more than one species can be present in the same animal, however only one will be dominate
- There are two important diseases caused by roundworms:
Particular problems for lambs include:
Diagram 1 shows the life cycle for The 1
Diagram 2 shows the life cycle for Notice that the 3
The regulations stipulate that preventative livestock management techniques are used instead of the prophylactic use of chemical medicinal products
A farm 'health plan' must be constructed to outline the appropriate measures to be taken if particular circumstances arise
Animals that become sick or injured must be treated by first using medicinal products that comply with organic farming principles; (plant extracts or plant, animal, mineral products)
If the above products don't work & the animal is in distress or is suffering, chemically synthesised medication may be administered, a record made and there is a legal 'withdrawal' period (28 days)
Clean grazing does not aim to eradicate roundworms but rather achieve an acceptable level of control based on the known ecology of the nematodes
Diagrams 1 & 2 show the cycle of both nematodes. By rotating sheep between fields & ensuring that the 'new' field the sheep enter in the rotation has been free from grazing sheep, the likelihood of there being egg larvae present is small & therefore that field is deemed to be 'safe pasture'. By carrying out this technique the life cycle of the nematode is broken & the threat posed by these parasites in a low input system are reduced, however, completely clean, uncontaminated land is impossible to achieve.
Acceptable larvae egg numbers:
Regular egg count samples should be taken from fresh dung. Lab testing should identify the number of eggs per gram (EPG). A good result would produce an EPG of >100, however an EPG of between 500-1000 will mean productivity losses will begin to become apparent, and EPG values <2000 will possibly result in lamb deaths.
A micro fungus known as
Administered in sheep feed, this noval non-chemical approach would be well suited to organic livestock farmers if found to be economic.
Clean grazing explained:Clean grazing does not aim to eradicate roundworms but rather achieve an acceptable level of control based on the known ecology of the nematodesDiagrams 1 & 2 show the cycle of both nematodes. By rotating sheep between fields & ensuring that the 'new' field the sheep enter in the rotation has been free from grazing sheep, the likelihood of there being egg larvae present is small & therefore that field is deemed to be 'safe pasture'. By carrying out this technique the life cycle of the nematode is broken & the threat posed by these parasites in a low input system are reduced, however, completely clean, uncontaminated land is impossible to achieve. Acceptable larvae egg numbers: Regular egg count samples should be taken from fresh dung. Lab testing should identify the number of eggs per gram (EPG). A good result would produce an EPG of >100, however an EPG of between 500-1000 will mean productivity losses will begin to become apparent, and EPG values <2000 will possibly result in lamb deaths.Biological fungus developments:A micro fungus known as Duddington flagrans has been found in recent studies to survive passing through the digestive tract of sheep & therefore is able to infect the egg larvae passed by the sheep & prevent the larvae spreading in the field. Administered in sheep feed, this noval non-chemical approach would be well suited to organic livestock farmers if found to be economic.