Food security can be defined as when all people, at all times, have access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life, (FAO, 2007).
China's rapid growth in population, development and industrialisation in recent years has not just surprised many people, but the consequence of such accelerated growth has implications that dominate the country's government and will have continued global effects. The following points will be addressed to consider China's current situation with regard to food security:
In order to understand China's present situation, it is important to consider how the country has developed and worked to achieve the agricultural system seen today. China has a long history of agricultural production. Although its' achievements are impressive, such as successive cropping, intercropping and inlaid cropping (that multiplied the cropping areas within the limited cultivatable area) and good soil husbandry that allowed the crops to be continually grown year after year, the drawbacks are intrinsically linked to these successes. Chinese agriculture has historically concentrated on increasing the yield per unit area and has not taken into consideration the advantages of increasing labour productivity. This didn't seem to matter because there were enough people to enable production, but, as population continued to increase, the pressure upon the limited amount of land to deliver intensified, (Guohua & Peel, 1991). China had successfully fed one fifth of the world's population from one fifth of the world's cultivatable land FAO, (1999), and still manages to produce vast amounts of grain with which to feed its own population.
China's recent agricultural history has seen many changes in land reform, such as the farmland revolution in 1950 which redistributed land from landlords to landless peasants. Following this, the next reform came in the mid-1950s when the people's commune was established, encouraging people to group together as cooperatives to farm the land that had centrally controlled property rights, which ended in the collapse of the agricultural sector as farmers lost their freedom to farm the way they wanted, (Chen 1999). Further reform came in the 1970s, when China decided to introduce family based contract systems where the farmer had land use rights and the right to make decisions, therefore allowing the farmer freedom to farm, even though there was no land ownership. Not only this, but the Chinese government offered incentives that were linked to production, which as we know already from the old CAP subsidy in the UK, has dramatic effects on production. However, there were problems associated with this reform, which were firstly the fragmentation of cultivated land, due to each household being entitled to plots of land, and with such a large population, this meant only a very small area of land per family, roughly 0.466 ha, (Ministry of Agriculture of China, 1993). Different areas of land were also more productive than others, which meant that the land a family owned could be located at multiple locations around a village, raising concerns about labour and time efficiency and large areas of potentially cultivatable land were wasted because of paths and boundaries separating people's land, Chen 1999).
The way land has been managed and cultivated in the past, which was shaped strongly by policy, is not the only factor affecting China's present problem regarding food security. As has already been mentioned, the current state of China's water supply, chiefly in two of the country's largest rivers, has been recently described as unsafe for human contact. The main cause for this sorry state of affairs is again due to the rapid industrialisation occurring in the country. Large investment in industry is not being met with the required infrastructure and services to process waste or emissions. A figure to highlight the severity of the problem comes from World Bank (2001) where 23.4 billion tonnes of sewage and industrial water was dumped into the Yangtze in the year 2000, which was 11% more than in the proceeding year. Organic and inorganic pollutants found in both the Yellow and Yangtze includes human excreta, industrial chemicals, heavy metals, cyanide and solvents, most of which originate from paper, steel, silk and chemical factories. Agriculture is also highlighted as being a contributor to this pollution and in some places, sediment run-off due to erosion was causing problems, both in the rivers and from cultivatable land, (World Bank, 2004). This is not only a problem in itself, but an ongoing problem with regard to agriculture, as water is required for irrigation and obviously the use of contaminated water in this instance would not be allowed.
Monitoring of progress towards achieving improvements in food security is important. Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) are important and should still remain, however small scale indicators of improvement could be monitored by farm surveys, covering things such as measurements of rainfall run-off, rates of erosion and also could include the health and level of food intake of people on that farm. Information from all farms could then be collated and progress monitored at this local scale. Areas not progressing as well as other areas could then be addressed accordingly. Continued monitoring of water quality and water safety would also be advised, not just for agricultural use, but for the interest of the country.
Food security for any country is important and the sustainable production of food in an ever increasingly developing and urban world is even more important. For a country such as China, whose huge population is exerting pressure on the environment and encroachment of urban sprawl is reducing land area for production of food, it seems impossible to propose sustainable methods of production. However, local projects to aid food production in rural areas should target issues such as soil erosion and to some degree water use, but the later is also highly dependant on sustainable industrial and domestic use of water. Government policy has its part to play, however, local scale projects will reach the isolated rural people quicker. For a sustainable future, China must broaden its thinking in giving agriculture the same importance as its newly developing industry, other wise, the future of China's food security will be reliance on imports and a demise of the people who skillfully work China's productive land.