The groundnut (Arachis hypogaea) is the 13 th most important food crop in the world, the 4 th most important source of edible oil and the 3 rd most important source of vegetable protein, ICRISAT (2006). Therefore, it is not only of local importance to the countries in which it is grown, but also global importance due to demand for the raw and derivative products. Developing countries account for 96% of the groundnut production land area and 92% of the world production. In the global context, Africa contains 38% of the land area cultivated and accounts for 25% of the total production of groundnuts, ICRISAT (2006). With annual rainfall figures of between 600-1000mm, suitable climate and sandy Alfisols and Oxisols soils, (Virmani &amp; Singh, 1986), West Africa provides ideal conditions for groundnuts to be sown in June/July and harvested in September/October. Labour constraints pose a serious problem to production, as do the plethora of pest and disease problems which threaten yields.
The following points will be addressed:
Regarding the control of pests, integrated pest management (IPM) offers great potential to these developing country farmers. IPM can be defined as "a pest management system that, in the context of the total environment and the population dynamics of the pest species, utilizes all suitable techniques and methods in as compatible a manner as possible and maintains pest populations at levels below those causing economic injury" (Glass, 1975). This essentially means preventing the establishment and spread of insect pests, controlling established infestations, or maintaining already existing pest/disease outbreaks at a level which causes minimum damage Lynch et al. (1986). Educating farmers to the possible benefits of IPM a) protection of the environment b) reduction of costs c) residue-free products, would undoubtedly be a good thing.
With groundnut being a cash crop and a legume, its importance to the grower is great. Its use as an intercrop with cowpea and other cereal crops is important in maximising the output from the small areas of cultivated land and also in spreading the risk of loss, if disease/pest damage occurs in one of the crops planted. More extensive use of the intercrop system would clearly be advantageous and a government-funded grant/aid scheme for the purchase of low tech mechanical cultivation equipment would help on every level, ie: area of land cultivated, labour constraints and urban demand.
Rain harvesting and/or irrigation systems would help reduce the reliance on seasonal variation in rainfall.
The introduction of a locally distributed seed programme to supply affordable high quality seed to growers, which would, in turn, if successful, be self-sustaining. Reliance on a centralised seed supplier and associated problems would be avoided. This has been successfully achieved in Malawi with the help of UNICEF and ICRISAT and the distribution of CG 7 variety of groundnut (Nautiyal, 2002).
Post harvest problems could be partly addressed by improvement in drying procedures and low cost storage facilities at farm level.