A Sample of potassium iodate (approx, 1.0 g) which was dried over night at 120 C was provided. The sample was weighed first and the empty container was re- weighed. It was dissolved quantitatively and diluted with potassium iodate to volume and mixed well.
10ml standard potassium iodate was transferred by using a pipette into a conical flask and 10ml potassium iodide solution (10 percent m/v) and 5 ml 1 M Sulfuric acid were added.
10 ml of milk was transferred into a 100ml Volumetric flask. 25 ml of water added and it was mixed gently.40 ml of tungstic acid reagent were added and gently mixed. It was diluted to volume with water. Stopper was put in and allowed the precipitate to settle. It was later filtered through a dry pleated filter paper into a dry flask. The first running was discarded and 50ml of filtrate was collected. It was done in duplicate, together with duplicate blank determinations using 10ml of water instead of filtrate.
10ml of filtrate was transferred by a pipette into a glass stoppered flask. Potassium iodide solution ( 10 percent, m/v) was added by a pipette mixed gently. The flasks were left in the dark for 90 minutes. The stopper was removed and rinsing with a little water, 5ml 2M of Hydrochloric acid was added. The liberated iodine was titrated using standardized 0.02M sodium thiosulfate solution until the solution turned into pale yellow colour. 25 ml of water was added a few drops of starch indicator were added and the titration was completed until the blue colour just disappeared.
The principle of this analysis is that silver nitrate reacts with chloride in the milk and excess reacts with thiocyanate. Duplicate samples were prepared using milk. 10ml of milk was weighed into a 250ml conical flask.10 ml of standard 0.05M silver nitrate solution was added with a pipette.10 ml of conc. Nitric acid was added.(70%m/m) It was mixed and the contents was boiled for a few minutes by using a steam water bath with occasional shaken, in a fume cupboard. When the precipitate in the flask was granular and the liquid turned pale yellow, this flask was covered by a beaker and it was kept for cooling.
When it was cooled down, 20ml of water was added and 1 ml Iron (3) indicator solution was added. It was titrated with standardised 0.05 thiocyanate solution until a faint red-brown colour persisted on vigorous shaking.
10.4.0 Realtionship between the lactose and chloride contents of cow's milk
The chloride content of normal milk seldom exceeds 0.13 percent when calculated on the whole milk (national average 0.105 percent. Milk derived from cows suffering from mastitis milk (mastitis milk), however when compared with normal milk shows increased chloride and soluble nitrogen figures, together with a reduction in the amounts of lactose and casein.