The objective is to go through the procedures to produce UHT milk by direct processing and to evaluate the quality of a range of heat treated milk products.
Raw milk was yellow in colour and when it has undergone the UHT process the colour of the milk was more whiter.
When we compare the Freezing point depression values of Raw milk and UHT. UHT milk has a higher value since , the milk has taken more water by the steam.
Commercial samples of Milk
Processing temperatures
And the following pressures; (insert units)
Flow rate: 129-130l/h
Determine the average residence time (holding tube = 260cm long and 0.96 cm diameter: assume turbulent flow:
Estimate the Fo (based on tmin).
The UHT temperature was 145.2
Assuming that the flow is turbulent, the minimum residence time in the holding tube was:
Thus, the F
The samples of the milk tested have been ranged for their intensity of turbidity and microbial growth on the agar slope. The results are given in the table below with 1 indicating the lowest intensity of turbidity and 6 the highest.
Our group of students did tasting of the commercial samples and our UHT milk sample. The majority of members preferred, our direct UHT sample was much better than the three commercial samples. The Waitrose organic milk had an oxidised off flavour. There preference ranking for the samples were as follows:
By comparing the values of the freezing point depression, we could say that the UHT (direct) milk was slightly lower than the one of the raw milk. Consequently, the water content was lower for the UHT direct milk, it has been concentrated and not diluted, comparing to the raw milk. This was due to the fact that the control of the temperature of the before steam heating begins and the temperature of cooling in the flash cooler. To avoid dilution or concentration of the milk these two temperatures should ideally the same, so as to allow the evaporation of the exact quantity of water that has been diluted during steam heating. The lower the temperature of cooling, the more water evaporates from the milk, thus in the case of the UHT sample tested, the pressure of cooling was lower than the appropriate one.
The fact of the concentration of the milk can also be determined through the comparison of the concentration of protein, lactose and milk solids non fat between the UHT direct and raw milk sample, which are higher for the former.
With direct heating systems, the product is heated to sterilisation temperature by mixing it with steam. Some of the steam condenses giving up latent heat of vaporization to the product and giving much more rapid rate of heating than is available with any indirect system. The steam may be injected into the product know as steam injection or steam infusion or product-into-steam. These two methods give different characteristics and are considered separately.
This method of heating can cause considerable dilution of the product. For example, a 60 The design of the holding section for a desired residence time must therefore take into account that the flow rate within it will be greater than the inlet product flow rate.
Cooling of the product may be by any indirect heat exchanger that is suitable to the product characteristics. Therefore, the added water will remain in the product and allowance for the dilution must be made in the product formulation. The steam quality is important, and contamination of the food product by steam pipe corrosion or boiler feed water additives must be eliminated. Those food products where the added water is not acceptable, or where very rapid cooling is required, "flash cooling" may be used.
The thermal efficiency of a direct heating system may be increased by indirect regenerative heating before the product is mixed with steam; this may be achieved by heat transfer from the outgoing product is mixed with steam; this may be achieved by heat transfer from the outgoing product after the expansion cooling stage, by recovery of heat from the water vapour liberated in the expansion, or by using the condenser cooling water on the exit from the condenser, when it has been heated.
High rates of heating and cooling are obtainable in direct plants. This means that the ideal of high temperatures held for short times, which is the basis of the continuous-flow thermal process, is more easily obtainable with direct than with indirect systems.
Practical advantage of the direct heating systems are its ability to process more viscous products, particularly those that cannot be satisfactorily handled in plate-type indirect plant, and comparative freedom from fouling. For example, a direct plant may be able to operate producing UHT milk without cleaning for twice the length of time of a plate-type indirect plant.
A direct heating plant is relatively complex. Much of it is non-standard and specially fabricated, unlike heat exchanger plates and tubes. It requires additional equipment such as expansion vessels and condensers.
Water consumption for cooling in a high-regeneration indirect plant during operation is negligible, because the cooling requirements are met by the incoming cold product. Even an indirect plant with lower regeneration levels, the cooling water requirements are relatively modest. Direct plants require large amounts of water, particularly for the operation of the condenser.
Direct heating systems need more pumps than indirect systems. It needs three product pumps of different types, as well as a homogeniser if the product requires it, and a vacuum pump for the removal of the non condensable gases from the condenser. Only a single pump may be needed with an indirect system, together with a homogeniser.
At the stage of flash cooling, the temperature and the pressure of the process should adequately controlled to avoid dilution or concentration of the product due to removal of quantity of water less or more, respectively, than the one of the steam which has been condensed at the previous stage.
As mentioned above UHT direct systems can achieve the heating of the product at very high temperatures for short periods of times. This combination is beneficial for the quality of the product, as although the desired microbial quality is attained the nutritional quality of the product is also preserved.
Finally, as far as the processing of milk is concerned, when milk is heated above 85 The flash cooling process involved in the direct systems results in the loss of some components which are more volatile than water, like oxygen, the components mentioned above and, and other desirable or undesirable flavour components, which may lead to a further change of product quality. This fact is the reason for which direct UHT milk is regarded to have less cooked flavour than the indirect.