Global mean surface temperature has increased by approximately 0.7 oC since pre-industrial times. This increase is thought to have been mostly caused by human activity, principally the release of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. There are, however, many other factors, both anthropogenic and natural which could have an effect on climate. Attributing the observed climate change to each of these factors is a great challenge facing climate scientists.
In this experiment a simple, zero-dimensional, two-layer spreadsheet model was used to investigate the effects of different radiative forcings on global mean temperature. The model allows climate feedback parameter Y to be varied, and estimates of the ten most important radiative forcings can be included, plus one user-defined forcing. Each forcing can be applied with a scaling factor to modify its effect.
The model calculates the combined forcing for each year between 1850 and 2006, and from this the temperature anomaly relative to the 1961 - 1990 average and also relative to the 1850 - 1879 average (In this exercise the 1961 - 1990 average will be used for all comparisons). The equilibrium temperature change for the relevant forcing at each year is also calculated. The model produces plots of the combined radiative forcings, the global mean temperature anomaly relative to the two stated time periods, with each plotted alongside the observed temperature anomaly, and also the model vs equilibrium temperature change for each year. A 
2 error value for the difference between model and observed temperature anomaly is also calculated.
The model produces useful results, despite being a fairly simple approximation. The fit of the model temperature anomaly to the observed values is good enough to provide evidence that the observed temperature change over the last century is largely attributable to anthropogenic sources, particularly the emission of greenhouse gases.
There are however several limitations to the model which could affect the reliability of the results. The Climate Feedback Parameter Y is assumed to be the same for all different radiative forcing mechanisms, which is not the case in reality. The model does not provide any information about spatial variability in temperature change.