For too long the history of the Cold War has been written from a 'top-down' perspective examining elites and decision-makers. Whilst political scientists have become mired in using rational International Relations models, historians have rarely cast their net beyond realpolitik, frequently falling foul of detailed narrative around contingencies which often never occurred. The fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the end of the 30-year rule for many documents in the West, which both led to a spate of archival-based sources available to historians, cemented this diplomatic and empirical approach. Moreover, archival work alone is a dangerous place from which to survey the Cold War, since both sides of the Iron Curtain employed 'newspeak' rather than rational discourse, even behind closed doors. In short, this 'New Cold War history' can become overly narrative driven and blind to broader analysis. However, as a result of the growing interest in cultural history following the 1980s 'linguistic turn', recent study, particularly in the so called 'Constructivist' school, has challenged Cold War historians to spread their wings methodologically, and explore the culture of the conflict. In spite of noteworthy 'hot' episodes, such as Vietnam, the Cold War was in most part a conflict of words and images delivered to an audience soaked in its products.
One unmined area of Cold War culture is Hollywood Bomb Cinema. Bomb Cinema denotes films where the nuclear bomb is an explicit part of the theme or narrative and includes a body of films, widely forgotten, from classics such as Working under Freud's avowal that a cigar is sometimes only a cigar, their inquiry is devoid of any attempt to unearth hidden realities. Apocryphal moments are not examined for anything more than meaningless and pleasurable fantasy. For example, in reviewing C. Scott'.
So why should historians concern themselves about films with images of the bomb? Put simply, the sheer number of these films reveal how deeply concerned Americans were about the bomb. Paul Boyer has argued that the bomb itself is a virtual Kantian category - an internal filter - that shapes our very understanding of the world. Thinking about the function of these films, Hayden White argues that historical and fictional discourses have common aspects in narratives and transmit messages about shared reality. Accordingly, at any given historical point, there exists a common pool of narratives that every culture disposes for its members who might wish to draw upon them for the transmission of messages. For example, the Supreme Command Allied Powers (SCAP) censored references to Hiroshima and Nagasaki in films made during the occupation of Japan. Jacques Derrida, in his work on the 'nuclear subject', has argued that since the terrifying reality of nuclear war can only be the signified referent and never the real referent of a discourse, the view of fictitious projects, such as Bomb Cinema, occupy a space equal to the views of 'experts'. By giving a privileged opportunity to laugh at those in authority, Bomb Cinema can afford the individual the bitter-sweet illusion of panoptical power on the inside, by stripping away his real Cold War position of powerlessness on the outside. Seen in this way, the term subversion is synonymous with liberated power for the individual.
By deconstructing key bomb films, it will be argued that by 1963 and The state sponsored  However, far from heralding the first cataclysmic step outside of the propaganda paradigm, Working under the constant eye of the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC), the distinctly science fiction wing of Bomb Cinema used covert images to depict the anxieties that accompanied life with the bomb. Part of the so-called 'Cold War camp', SF films like Yet, as Peter Biskind recognises, these films were very rarely in universal agreement and did have varying degrees of departure from the propaganda paradigm. Thus, this paper uses not only the films themselves but also draft scripts, biographies and newspaper reviews and articles of the period. The issues examined here - nuclear proliferation, Organisation Man, scientists and technology - are the most prevalent in Bomb films.
Nuclear proliferation is the most obvious theme in bomb films. In our period, the nuclear powers exponentially increased their arsenals of destructive potential, within the prevailing and public strategy of Mutually Assured Destruction (MAD). Ex-US Defense Secretary (1961-68), and architect of MAD, Robert McNamara later called proliferation 'the foundation of stable deterrence in a nuclear world...resting on the understanding that if either side initiates the use of nuclear weapons, the other side will respond with sufficient power to inflict unacceptable damage'.  It depicts the bomber force as a safeguard to protect Americans from the bomb. Real SAC imagery is always at work, such as the billboard sign at the base entrance, 'the nation and your security are at stake', and the Command's motto, 'Peace is our Profession'. The dialogue supports this argument too with Rusty asserting 'we're the only thing that keeps the peace'. However, the main function of the film was to ingrain in citizens the moral resolve needed to live in the Cold War. Security officials knew it would have been impossible to protect Americans from nuclear attack. For example, Millard Caldwell - head of the Federal Civil Defense Administration 1950-52 - believed that 'when a situation is utterly hopeless, it may be better not to say so. The doctors often conclude against telling the hopeless cancer patient what the situation is'. It is worth remembering that, at the time of the film's release, the Alert America campaigns were in full swing, and the gospel of self-help was the new mantra of civil defence planners. By showing reluctant cold warriors, and their even more reluctant wives, subordinating their civilian lives to the demands of the state,
Subversive bomb cinema exploded the propaganda line of the security of American defence.  Sending a clear signal about the illusory security of America, the alien spaceship lands in Washington, despite being monitored by security forces, and proves immune to human weaponry. Indeed, Cold War power is shown in the most microcosmic terms when the alien Klaatu makes the earth stand still, and declares that 'at the first sign of violence, your earth will be reduced to a burned out cinder'.
Released in 1951, the film presents a direct challenge to the pursuit of the fusion bomb, which, when developed, would make nuclear holocaust possible. This message on arms control is poignantly captured when Klaatu charges 'live in peace or face obliteration'. The arms race is thus presented as an international problem which the United Nations must solve.  The film ends on the thought that American power could not prevent annihilation, with Scotty lamenting 'I bring you warning... Watch the skies. Everywhere... Keep watching the skies'.
 According to Allan Winkler, fallout focused public fears because it threatened a less violent form of extinction and presented the danger of both psychological, as well as physical deformity. Indeed, one character questions 'if these monsters got started as a result of the first atomic bomb in 1945, what about all the others that have been exploded since then?' Yet Like When Dr Medford laments, in clearly Biblical terms, 'and there shall be destruction... and the Beasts shall reign over the earth', the likeness is just discernible.
The black comedy ending of For Kubrick, the logical result of Soviets 'lofting satellites as easily as Americans dunked baskets' and bomb shelters proliferating like greenhouses, was nuclear Armageddon. Cynically rejecting the safeguards projected in When General Turgidson argues for 'catching them with their pants down', in a pre-emptive first strike, Turgidson's insane proposal is no different from the calls by Air Force chief General Curtis LeMay to give them 'Sunday punch'. Recent findings support Kubrick's observation on the instability of the arms race. We now know that the military had developed the 'Single Integrated Operations Plan', which worked on the assumption that America would have been willing to be the first to use nuclear weapons.
Military critics derided Indeed, Kubrick famously created the interior of his B-52 based on pictures in an old flight manual. There was also a forced Air Force disclaimer that 'safeguards would prevent the occurrence of events depicted in this film', as the military had always maintained that no attack could be launched without 'civilian authority'. Indeed, LeMay was known for goading the Soviet Union with unauthorised reconnaissance flights. By 1964, missions had resulted in 26 planes being shot down over the Soviet Union.
Beyond the proliferation issue, there were other recurring themes in Bomb Cinema. The next of these is the impact of the organization on man. In Of himself, he isolated, meaningless...by sublimating himself in the group, he helps produce a whole that is greater than the sum of its parts'.  Even the role of husband and father has to take a back seat to the organization, as Dutch declares 'we can't schedule the flights according to the birth schedule'. When Dutch falls prey on mission to an injury he has failed to disclose, the crew takes over and saves the day. He is subsequently denounced for jeopardising the lives of his team-mates and the health of the organization. Echoing Whyte's comment that 'the man of the future is not the individualist but the man who works through others for others',
However, most subversive bomb cinema showed that the growing regimentation of corporate culture made man bereft of any genuine individual identity and sense of accomplishment. The most pertinent statement in Living in suburbia, 'the dormitory of the new generation of organization men', and working as a reluctant organization man in his brother's firm, Robert Carey finds little achievement in his life. In his ritual killing of the spider, Carey loses his fear of alienation from the group, experiencing a psychological transformation. In revealing, 'and then I meant something too... To God there is no zero', Carey asks the audience to embrace his liberation. In addition, the film shows that the famous sentence in the Communist Manifesto stating that the proletariat has nothing to lose but its chains has little relevance for the organization man. Robert Carey has something to lose conjecturally - his standard of living. Carey represents a wider metonym for contemporary American middle-class families who, having run up large debts, became trapped in the net of the bourgeois milieu.
 Asserting 'I'm not working for the world. I'm working for the Air Force', Hendry begins as the archetypal wheel-in-machine conformist, who cannot blow his nose without clearing it first with Headquarters. For example, using standard procedure to free an alien ship, Hendry accidentally blows it up. Hendry is actually immobilised by bureaucracy, stating 'until I receive my instructions from my superior officers, we'll have to mark time'. However, as we have shown, SF films were anything but unanimous in agreement.  It argues that society should embrace the organization man culture and posits that to leave the group is to be beyond the safe parameters of society. All the victims succumb when they leave the confines of the group. Furthermore, it takes a consortium of scientists, police and soldiers to defeat the ants.
The role of scientists manifests itself in Bomb Cinema. Social critic Bertrand Russell argued that 'we are perhaps living in the last age of man, and, if so, it is to science that we will owe this extinction'. In its portrayal of the nefarious Dr Carrington, Admiring the creature, Carrington helps it reproduce itself, and interferes with attempts on its life. The scientist inherent in Carrington is the extremist head-over-heart zealot, assiduously pursuing his parochial interests and immune to the fact that he might, in the process, be fomenting Armageddon. For example, Carrington's morally blind quest for advancement is made explicitly clear when he states 'knowledge is more important than life'.
Scientists, however, were both reviled and revered. In In contrast to Carrington, Dr Medford, in
In his closing statement, 'We've opened the door into another world. What we'll eventually find nobody can predict', Medford echoes the concerns of Robert Oppenheimer, and recognises the dangers of using the test tube to tamper with nature. We see scientists working at the kernel of government policy. Medford lectures public officials, commands the resources of the state and devises the plan to destroy the menace. Indeed, Medford sees his elevated role as a 'scientist's dream'. When his daughter insists on joining the men in a dangerous trip, Agent Graham remarks 'it's no place for you or any other woman'.
During his terms in office, Eisenhower did more than any previous President to integrate science into the state. Yet, in his farewell address he exhibited more than a powerful note of irony, warning that 'we must be alert to the...danger that policy could become the captive of a scientific-technological elite'. As the premier authority on the Doomsday Machine, Dr Strangelove - struggling with his 'Heil-Hitler' hand and speaking in a terse German accent, which denotes his Nazi affiliations - is devoid of love for anything except the bomb. Despite his mental deterioration, the leadership cede all power to him by the end, as they are completely distracted by his plans to continue the human race. Dr Strangelove can be seen as a parody of the Hydrogen Bomb scientist Dr Edward Teller. Repudiated by many of his scientific colleagues for testifying against Robert Oppenheimer, who called for nuclear restraint and internationalism, Teller ran with a more military crowd, becoming the darling of conservative thinkers for his advocacy of American scientific supremacy.
The final area of this paper addresses a theme unique to the films of subversion. All subversive films involve some measure of destruction and they question how this is allowed to happen. On Judgement Day who, or what, is at fault; the nature of man and his failings to control events or unrestrained technology growth? Witnessing no destruction, The characters exhibit no militant anticommunist hysteria, preferring not even to name the enemy, and simply refer to him as 'the other fella'.
 This supports Stanley Kauffman's argument that 'ban the bomb and they'll find another way. The real Doomsday machine is men'. Unable to attain an audience with the world's leaders, given the bipolar tensions of the time, Klaatu complains to the President, 'I'm not concerned...with the internal affairs of your planet...my people have learned to live without [such stupidity]'. The President responds 'I'm afraid my people haven't'. One man calls him 'a wild animal'. Learning that the alien spacecraft is nuclear, Bobby exposes man's ignorance by stating 'I thought that was only for bombs'.
The custodians of the bomb are dealt a particularly vicious blow in subversive Bomb Cinema. Driven by virulent anti-communism, the American leadership is shown as nothing more than a group of modern Prometheans, morally blind to the implications of military conflagration.  Supposedly working for the 'good' of the people, these men are presented as captivated by deadly technology and oblivious to the destructive nature of their policies. It is Ripper who orchestrates the attack and Turgidson's remark, 'the human element seems to have failed us here', clearly illustrates the chasm between man's scientific skill and his political ineptitude. In his pep talk - 'the folks back home is a-countin' on you and, by golly, we ain't about to let-em down' Wearing a cowboy hat, which connects him to the frontier tradition and with the patriotic war song 'Johnny Comes Marching Home' providing music, Kong is presented as the dangerous short-sighted hero riding the bomb. Kubrick was not a lone voice in his negative treatment of the American leadership. For example, in his expressive Cold War jeremiad 'Gentleman: You are Mad', social commentator Lewis Mumford asserted that 'madmen govern our affairs in the name of security'.
Another aspect of the 'madmen' character explored in Echoing Senator Joseph McCarthy, who spoke of the 'communist with a razor blade poised over the jugular vein of this nation', Ripper manifests similar obsessive anti-communism by asserting, 'I can no longer sit back and allow...the international communist conspiracy to impurify all of our bodily fluids'.
Civilians are equally culpable. President Muffley is presented as the ineffectual Liberal who is unable to halt the madness around him. By arguing with Premier Kissof over who is sorrier for imminent global holocaust, Muffley not only exhibits the preposterous nature of Cold War tensions but also appears to see the event as no more than a social faux pas. Although, 'relentlessly perceptive of human beings to the point of inhumanity', It is worth remembering that since 1945 delivery system advances had grown considerably, resulting in the land based missile, which is impervious to any recall signal. In part then,
In conclusion, Bomb Cinema between 1950 and 1964 revealed two cultural personalities in conflict. Under the surface of These reached their climax with Lewis Mumford stated in 1964 that Lost on Film Studies scholars and reviewers, these films, even in their most apocryphal moments, were brimming with surreptitious statements on the atomic age. In our efforts to excavate the hidden and the not so hidden, we have also proved that within SF there existed a network of competing ideologues and measures of departure from the overriding propaganda paradigm.
Yet, the importance of Arguably Gramsci argued that culture is a non-coercive means whereby the ruling-classes maintain their dominance by securing the consent of subordinate groups. Moreover, hegemony operates by allowing Thus, it is not surprising that we find in certain 1950s SF bomb films moments of divergence from the dominant paradigm. Here is concession at work. What It also signifies the decisive moment when audiences are no longer able to watch the nuclear subject straight. Kubrick originally had intended a straight adaptation of Peter George's novel Released shortly after