Laceration (15x8cm) to left lower shin following a motorcycle accident on . An ambulance was called by a motorist.
Soft tissue injuries are those injuries (excluding fractures) affecting the joints and muscles of the limbs. Sprains, strains and dislocations are considered soft tissue injuries, with some authorities also including bruising. Soft-tissue injuries are often classified as:
The treatment of soft tissue injuries is based on resting the injured part, applying ice packs to limit swelling and reduce pain, the application of a firm compression bandage as support, and elevation of the limb. This treatment is known as 'RICE'.
RICE = Rest, Ice, Compression and Elevation
Ice packs should be placed on for a maximum of 10 minutes and can be re-applied when the damaged area becomes warm again. Never apply ice directly onto the skin, as this may cause tissue damage. Always use a barrier, such as cloth, between the ice pack and the skin to help protect tissue.
Mr  has been referred to hospital after a motorcycle accident where he sustained a laceration to his left lower shin. He will be treated with a skin graft once the wound heals up sufficiently. He has osteoarthritis in both of his knees, both wrists and in his lower lumbar region.
Ideas. Mr  is aware that he had an accident and he attributes this to slipping on some spilt diesel. He describes it as an unnavoidable accident. He states that there is an increase in the number of motorcycle accidents due to lorries having ineffectual diesel caps whci do not seal very well. Therefore when the lorry turns a corner it spills diesel.
Concerns. Mr  is concerned that he may have more blood clots in his left leg. This would mean that his stay in hospital would be prolonged whilst they are removed. He has not been given a time frame for when he might be discharged and since he is bed bound he is very bored. He would like to have some idea of when he might be able to go home. He is also concerned about how long it might take for his leg to heal because he is the main breadwinner. He has suffered from depression in the past and there is a risk of him developing depression again and this could stunt his physical recovery.
Expectations. He hopes that if clots are found they will be removed. This will be followed by a skin graft. He hopes that it will not take long for the graft to heal and then he will be able to start working again.
When treatments such as anti-inflammatory medications, cortisone injections, and physical therapy fail to improve the situation, total knee replacement could be an option. A Total right knee replacement was undertaken for the management of Mrs
He is still waiting for his skin graft.
Cemented total knee replacements will remain the gold standard for total knee replacement but the use of uncemented designs with bioactive surfaces such as hydroxyapatite are showing promising midterm results.
Research into mobile bearing knee replacements continues. Such prostheses appear to demonstrate an attractive way of overcoming the constraint versus conformity conflict inherent in any artificial knee replacement.
Total knee replacement in some form has been practiced for over 50 years. The complexities of the knee joint only began to be understood 30 years ago. Significant advances have occurred in the type and quality of the metals, polyethylene, and more recently, ceramics used in the prosthesis manufacturing process, leading to improved longevity. As with most techniques in modern medicine, more and more patients are receiving the benefits of total knee arthroplasty (TKA)