This report aims to identify and review the very relevant prose related to the field of molecular control by employing evolutionary algorithms (aided with a suitable short pulse laser technology) . Whether the experiment is feedback based or not the report will aim to achieve and compare strategies utilized by academia in order to reach a consensus and understanding .This includes (but is not limited to ) previous work in the field, theories , direction , concepts and techniques . Owing to the nature of the report discussion relating to topics are as important as the source of that information .
In order to understand and manipulate very fast chemical and physical processes a better control of optical pulses needs to be achieved . In other words , It is possible control atoms and molecules by very short laser pulses using so-called femtosecond lasers which is fast becoming a very energized and challenging research field . Evolutionary algorithms are increasingly being utilized to optimize the shape of such laser pulses, based on reformulation of task as a high dimensional optimization problem . In terms of optimal control , laser induced molecular orientation as an optimization problem involves a global minimum search on a multi-dimensional surface function of varying parameters characterizing the pulse itself (frequency , peak intensity , temporal shape ). There is a high probability that any Genetic Algorithm aiming for optimization of different possible targets may temporarily be trapped in a local minimum .
Lasers have been around for more than 45 years and there has always been interest to generate ultra-short laser pulses in the picosecond(10 The first recorded instance of a pulse below the 100 fs duration occurred in 1981 with the use of colliding pulse mode-locked (CPM) ring dye laser This was further improved with subsequent nonlinear pulse compression culminating in a 6 fs short pulse Solid state laser media based femtosecond pulse generation brought many advantages The field which is more interesting is
Weiner SLMs (Spatial light modulators) allow reprogrammable waveform generation under computer control . Weiner's detailed report mentions several methods for shaping pulses mainly Linear Filtering , Amplified Pulse Alignments , Programmable Femtosecond Pulse shaping using Liquid Crystal SLMs , Programmable Pulse Shaping using Acousto-Optic Modulators and Shaping using movable and deformable mirrors . All based on the Pulse shaping theory
Evolutionary Algorithms are popular tools for search,optimization,machine learning and for solving design problems . EA s use simulated evolution to search for solutions to complex problems Generally evolution strategies and genetic algorithms Genetic Algorithms were developed in the US under the leadership of John Holland and his students The main ways these differ are that GA s put a great deal of emphasis on selection , recombination and mutation acting on a genotype that is decoded and evaluated for fitness resulting in the Recombination to be emphasized over mutation on the other hand ES tend to use more direct representations with mutation being emphasized over recombination . Although nowadays both of these freely borrow ideas from each other . Evolutionary algorithms are easily parallelized and are what are known as weak methods in the AI community as they do not exploit domain specific knowledge and usually are a sort of blind search method
The idea of Coherent Control was born out of mode-selective laser photochemistry , despite the initial buzz in the scientific world the dream of exciting specific chemical bonds dimmed for various reasons including the fact that controlling certain aspects were hampered by fast relaxation, complicated mode structure ,imperfect knowledge of inter-nuclear potentials along arbitrary coordinates and the distorting influence of strong external light fields Recent successful experiments have led to control of molecular ionization Large condensed molecules are so complicated that it is nearly impossible to calculate optimal pulse shapes in advance but recent experiments 15 have used experimental feedback to determine the optimal optical pulse shape to achieve a particular goal . In these cases ,absence of detailed knowledge of the system lead to selection of new pulse shape inside feedback loop using a Genetic Algorithm in order to discover control pathways in complicated physical systems . Judson and Rabitz 15 were also clearly able to demonstrate that an adaptive learning procedure could teach a laser to selectively excite chosen states of a molecule . Constraints on the form or amplitude of the driving field could readily be included in the Learning Algorithm in accordance with laboratory capabilities (laying foundations to experiment such as : by Hadjiloucasal. Conducted some fourteen years later - discussed later. ) also indicating that the introduction of intelligent physical bias in the control field could yield forms more readily generated in labs .
Pearson et al. They carried out several experiments (in different phases or mediums) in a variety of molecular systems whose common feature were the existence of observable physical properties that depended on the incident (shaped) light. The experiment deals with the construction of the algorithm and related adaptable operators and the further with a generic arrangement for measurement (as shown in Fig 1.).
The gaseous sample related experiment explores non linear control of ionization channels in diatomic sodium while many liquid phase experiments describe control of self phase modulation in CCl The experiment incorporated other concurrently running search methods in addition to traditional GA search strategies . Simple Harmonic Generation principles are utilized to observe changes in characteristics of the samples as this is demonstrated by the simple control experiment.
Assion et al. The optimization process was based on the feedback from reaction product quantities in a learning evolutionary algorithm that iteratively improved the phase of the applied femtosecond laser pulse . The experiments used CpFe(CO)2Cl showing two different bon-cleaving reactions could be selected , resulting in a chemically different product . The method worked completely autonomously finding optimal solutions without previous knowledge of the molecular system and the experimental environment .
Initially , laser selectivity is lost (or is almost non-existent) because of rapid intermolecular energy redistribution. A coherent control scheme (based on a set number of optimization parameters) is utilized to access the broad range of interference effects but May not have sufficient number of parameters for a complex system . Shi
The original experiment realized that by using a femtosecond laser system of pulse duration of 80 fs and an energy of 1 mJ at a centre wavelength of 800 nm and a repetition rate of 1 kHz , the goal of either maximizing or minimizing branching ratios of different organomettalic molecules is achieved without any knowledge of the specific molecular Hamiltonian (hence without requiring any knowledge about the experiment environment ) . The experiment then used an EA to optimize the spectral phase of femtosecond laser pulses . The "genetic configuration" of a single individual corresponded to the SLM pixel voltage encoding . An "individual fitness" was set equal to the measured branching ration of the competing reaction channels , that is , to the ratio of the respective ion signals .The "environment adaption" was found in the shaped laser pulse's capability of producing the desired experimental output . In the course of the evolutionary process , the reaction product in the numerator is favored at the cost of a reaction product in the denominator , because in each generation only the fittest individuals were selected for reproduction .
A highly significant French study by Atabek et al. Two targets were retained : the first , simple , one searching for an angle between molecular and laser polarization axes as close as possible to zero at a given time ; the second one combined the efficient of orientation with its duration . The experiment was illustrated by referring to two molecular systems HCN and LiF respectively . A sudden and asymmetric laser pulse leads to a kick mechanism resulting in a fast angular momentum transfer to the molecule , that turns out to be responsible for an efficient orientation after the pulse is turned off.
What needs to be considered is the fact that the control of such orientations require physically sound targets that have to be carefully defined. These are :
Target 1: aiming at maximization of the amplitude (in turn efficiency) of the orientation (expected value of cos
Target 2 : A hybrid item achieving a compromise between efficiency and duration in such a way as to maximise a time average of (cos
After the targets are defined , the optimal control schemedeals with the minimization problem on a multi-dimensional surface . Within these limitations of these sampling spaces , GAs turn out to be very efficient algorithms reaching a robust minimum after typically 500 generations.
A very recent interesting Korean (Republic of.) study by Hong et al. (2007) Explains reconstruction of electric field of femtosecond laser pulses from interferometric autocorrelation using an EA . In this study the GA is optimized for the intensity and phase characterization of several-cycle optical pulses . Then the efficiency of GA is tested with numerically-generated (random in this case) pulses and then applying it to the experimental data (using EPIRIAC algorithm - a special algorithm suited for reconstruction of several cycle femtosecond pulses from their IAC traces) .The application of EPIRIAC to the experimental IAC traces of a negatively chirped 31 fs pulse and a sub 10 fs pulse generated by an MDC Ti: Sapphire laser resulted in the reliable retrieval of their intensity and phase profiles . In this way the EA able to work for the temporal characterization of femtosecond laser pulses .
Hadjiloucas et al. A pump-probe spectroscopic device was used to map the potential energy(during non excitation state) surface of reactions and an evolutionary meta-algorithm in MATLAB (under LABVIEW environment) was applied . The evolutionary landscape generated (keeping in mind different trajectories followed during evolution of reaction) was searched with the EMA for all possible pulse shape leading to optimal product formation . When a global minima was reached a feedback loop in place was able to provide input to EMA for successful product formation .
The software module had two portions with the first application used the GA to match target waveform while the second solved molecular control problem for a four level system . The experiment concluded that it was possible and feasible to observe at least one order of magnitude improvement in the convergence rate using the designed EMA in both waveform matching and molecular control problems.
The National Physical Laboratories recent detailed report It is the culmination of work by several academics and scientist across the industry . The report provided several recommendations covering areas such as high speed electric pulse generation , generating tailored terahertz sources , molecular reaction dynamics and development of femtosecond enhancement cavity technology for applications among others . The report also compared and contrasted pulse shaping control strategies and explained their suitability for different kinds of experiments .
The relevant recommendations of the report are summarized below with the corresponding programmes they should become part of :
NMS Electrical Programme : Electrical Pulse generation and measurement - To calibrate high sensitivity devices ,NPL will be applying optical pulse shaping to its existing sub-picosecond electric pulse facility to investigate and develop electrical pulse shaping on a very small scale in order to meet such challenges .
THz Project : Terahertz Radiation : Pulse shapers will potentially be used for tailoring terahertz sources , this could be achieved by broadening the accessible spectral bandwidth or by enhancing the output at selected terahertz frequency bands of specific interest for end-user applications .
NMS Photonics Programme : Optical Communications : The existing ultra-short optical pulse measurement infrastructure could be extended to provide a robust optical pulse measurement system and pulse shaping capability in the 1550 nm band . This would enable NPL to characterize the soliton transmission properties of conventional and novel communications fibers for long-haul data transfer .
NMS Programmes including Time and Frequency , Photonics and measurement for Biotechnology : Femtosecond Optical Pulse Delivery : There needs to be further experimentation and studies into to optimize the propagation of femtosecond pulse trains in hollow-core fiber .
Quantum Metrology Programme : Chemical Reaction Dynamics - UK University groups should collaborate and share their expertise for development of techniques for measurement of femtosecond time-resolved molecular dynamics using pulse shaping and manipulate to achieve quantum control .
Multiphoton microscopy : pulse shaping in conjunction with adaptive coherent control would play a significant role in the development of microscopy methods such as two photon microscopy and CARS for practical imaging , particularly for biological samples .
In conclusion the report has successfully reviewed and identified very relevant articles related to the field . The field is very vast and requires collaboration on part of academics and industry . The combination of lasers producing specifically desired and intense ultrashort pulse with developments in programmable pulse-shaping technology and learning algorithms control will continue to a rapid expansion in the numbers of fields where they could be fully applied . These technologies have generated a huge amount of interest both in the scientific community and the media ,as the exciting possibilities of this new region of spectrum gradually becomes reality .