Viking-age shipbuilding has always been an important part of Danish cultural heritage. The techniques of this craft as well as its cultural implication has long been known to the people, however only with the discovery of Skuldelev ships, such a thorough analysis became possible. In the second quarter of 11 These ships then formed a barrier, part of a whole system of barriers protecting the southern part of Roskilde Fjord and the town of Roskilde.
The Roskilde Fjord project is one of the most detailed and planned investigations of ships and shipbuilding techniques in the world. It is also outstanding in terms of its duration, from the early investigations in the late 1950s. up till now, when more works on the publications and further interpretation and exhibition are still being carried out. The Danes are a very marine nation, hence the salvage and conservation of the ships is hugely significant for them, as being a part of their national tradition and cultural heritage. The Skuldelev ships are interesting both because of the unconventional purpose they have been used for in the past and of the innovative techniques that have been used to excavate them.
By far the most detailed and recent report from the excavations that has ever been published is the volume written by the two site directors, Ole Crumlin-Pedersen and Olaf Olsen, This is the main work that this evaluation will be based on, although it is important to remember about numerous smaller publications that appeared since the 1960s.
It is comparatively demanding to evaluate the weaknesses of the project, considering its scale and duration. Significant drawback of the project is a limited number of thorough, detailed and summarized publications of the results until recently, when the above mentioned volume was at last finalized. It is possible, that due to the lack of proper technology, mane data could not be analyzed in a sufficient way to present it in such a form. Additionally, it is fair to suspect, that Crumlin-Peredsen and Olsen were largely preoccupied with the conservation and presentation of the finds to the local people, as that was their initial priority.
There have been, indeed, many technological developments since the ships have been raised. New techniques of archaeological investigation were invented, such as geophysics or chemical analysis. Most of the data from the Skuldelev ships, however, come from the time of excavations in 1960s. Therefore, these new techniques have not been applied to them to the full extent yet. Although new dating methods have been already used and the species of wood analyzed, not much else has been done in terms of other potential source of information, such as the more detailed analysis of organic remains or the chemical analysis of traces of food or plants.
Although there have not been many other stray finds discovered with the ships, the ones that have been found have not received enough attention. They have been studied in their own context, but have neither been put into a wider context of the region nor of the relations with other regions. Many inferences could have been made about the social aspect of the finds, had they been analyzed from a slightly more anthropological point of view.
Roskilde project is a unique example of marine archaeology research, both in terms of its significance for Danish people and of the understanding of the development of Viking-age shipping. The wrecks themselves and the barrier as a whole can tell us a lot about the technology and society of contemporary people. The scale of the project, its importance and the amount of funding it received, all contributed to the establishment of such a successful centre for marine archaeology, which is a leading institution in Europe. Also because of the innovative techniques of excavation, the project became known to the wider public already at an early stage, which is evident in the number of people that visited the site when the works were still in progress. 28,000 people came to Roskilde to marvel the cofferdam that has been erected around the site and the emerging Viking ships, such an important part of their cultural heritage.
The project has numerous strong points, bearing in mind its extent, duration and scale it has almost reached perfection. Since the very beginning the methodology applied to the analysis of the site has been innovative and effective. During the first phase of excavations in the 1950s the techniques of scuba diving excavations have been put into practice and during the second phase in 1960s archaeologists showed even more technological creativeness and advancement by constructing a cofferdam to drain the site. In the course of research in the post-excavation phase, the interpretation of finds has been strongly influenced by the development of processual archaeology, which resulted in adoption of a more contextual approach.
This allowed putting the site into the historical and social context of the Viking-age Europe. Ship wrecks can be a useful source of information about the different types of contacts that occurred between European societies. This, however, has not been much explored yet, but Roskilde project is surely a pioneer in this field.
The results of the investigation have been very well published in the analyzed volume. The presentation of data is well-thought, clear, organized and clever. The authors began with the environmental background of the site, described the finds, their interpretation and the methods of conservation and dating. The volume is valuable both for professional archaeologists as well as simply people interested in the finds.
Furthermore, the results have been excellently displayed in a purpose-built museum building. The wooden elements have not just been put on display as they were found, but there is indication which part of ship they came from. The museum also made a reconstruction of the whole way of living associated with marine activities. Many attractions for kids have been organized, which draws even more attention to this already popular tourist destination in Denmark.
The drawback of the project is the enormous amount of time it took to produce a decent publication summarizing the obtained data. This, however, could be explained by the continuous technological developments that the museum team encountered in the way, which provided them with more and more new material, unavailable before. Bearing that in mind, the volume already seems slightly outdated, and many other things could have been analyzed, weather physically or chemically. Also the stray finds might have potentially been put into slightly wider context. Therefore, there are still a few points the authors can improve in their next publication, which in progress and will cover the experimental side of the project. Let us hope that the technology will not be too much ahead the authors at the time of this next publication.