Referred to A&amp;E by ambulance following a RTA.
has an open displaced fracture to his right tibia and fibula. In a displaced fracture, the bone breaks in two or more pieces that have moved out of alignment. The distortion is visible from the outside and the break often causes severe pain. In an open fracture, commonly called a compound fracture, the ends of the bone are displaced, visibly piercing the skin. In these cases, there is a significant risk of infection. After a displaced fracture, there may be pain, tenderness, stiffness, loss of movement and usually swelling in the affected area. The anatomic location of the fracture can be described as diaphyseal (involving the central shaft of a long bone), metaphyseal (involving the ends of the shaft of a long bone), physeal (involving the growth plate), or epiphyseal (involving the ends of a long bone).
Fractures involving the tibia and fibula are the most common lower extremity paediatric fractures. The tibia is the second longest bone of the skeleton, located at the medial side of the leg. It articulates with the fibula laterally, the talus distally, and the femur proximally, forming part of the knee joint. It attaches to the ligament of the patella and to various muscles, including the popliteus and the flexor digitorum longus. It also is called the shin bone.
The physician will take into account the location of the fracture, to what degree the bone is shattered, the amount of displacement, whether the adjacent joint surface is involved, or if the overlying muscle, fat and skin are disrupted, as in an open fracture. All of these facts help determine the best course of treatment. If a fracture extends into a joint, it must be carefully assessed with x-rays to determine if there is any significant change from the normal position of the joint surface. Fractures involving the joint may lead to early arthritis.
General: Patient comfortable in bed, he has a  cast over his right leg. He will have an operation later today.
Ideas. He considers his fracture to be an accident and places the blame on the bicyclist.
Concerns. He has been described by his father as a worrier.  has been quite distressed about being admitted to hospital and would like to return home as soon as possible. He is concerned about the forthcoming operation.
Expectations. He expects to leave hospital in the coming week. He is aware that he will be given some crutches and expects to return to school in the new week. He also expects that he will not be able to take part in sports activities until his plaster is removed in 10 weeks time. He is optimistic about the future and does not think the fracture will interfere in his plans to become a premier league footballer.
Analgesia may be administered to reduce the child's pain and anxiety during examination of the injury. Before palpation, the skin must be examined for breaks. The neurovascular status of the limb must be assessed prior to and after splinting and reduction. Although it is not necessary to palpate the site of an obvious fracture, palpation of adjacent or distant areas may be required to determine if more than one fracture may exist. A baseline motor examination should be completed. Assessment of the joints above and below the injury should be included.
Prior to obtaining radiographs, the limb should be temporarily immobilized to minimize soft tissue trauma and improve patient comfort. Views in the anteroposterior and lateral planes, are required. An oblique view may be necessary in areas such as the elbow or wrist. Comparison views of the opposite limb may be helpful in distinguishing growth plates from fracture lines.(1)
Open fractures carry a high risk of infection. Debris should be removed immediately. Pressure applied with a sterile pressure dressing will control hemorrhage. The limb should be splinted. The wound should be irrigated with saline and covered with saline-soaked sponges. Intravenous antibiotic prophylaxis, usually a first-generation cephalosporin should be initiated. Tetanus prophylaxis should also be administered.(2)
Operative treatment under general anesthesia is required for approximately 4-5% of paediatric fractures.(3) Indications for surgical stabilization include displaced epiphyseal fractures, displaced intra-articular fractures, unstable fractures, fractures in the multiply injured child, and open fractures. Three basic techniques are used in the surgical management of pediatric fractures:
Open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). Open reduction refers to intraoperative surgical reduction of the fracture ends.
Closed reduction and internal fixation. Closed reduction refers to manipulating the fracture externally to achieve reduction. Internal fixation refers to the insertion of metal pins, screws, plates or other hardware to stabilize or fixate the fracture once reduction is achieved
External fixation. External fixation refers to fixation of bones by splints, plastic dressings, or transfixion pins. Casts are sometimes considered external fixation but they are usually referred to as external support.
Open reduction and internal fixation may be required for displaced epiphyseal fractures (especially Salter-Harris types III and IV fractures, intra-articular fractures, and unstable fractures). Other indications include neurovascular injuries requiring repair, failure to obtain anatomic alignment, and occasionally, open fractures of the femur and tibia.
In this case the fracture was treated by suturing the periosteum and retinaculum and temporary smooth Kirschner wire (K-wire) fixation was performed. These "K" wires can be placed and replaced with minimal trauma to the bone until they are in optimal position. The cannulated screw is then placed over the wire and slid down to the bone surface. A special driving tool then allows the screw to be driven into the bone along the shaft of the K wire, in a manner very similar to the way radiologists pass angiographic catheters over guide wires using the Seldinger technique. The K-wire is then withdrawn.
Open fracture of the right tibia and fibula was stabilised with a k-wire.  will remain in hospital until he is able to use his crutches and is able to weight bear.