The aim of this investigation is to assess the language of a child determined as medically premature in comparison to popular child language data, of children born at term, by the likes of Fletcher (1985). The idea for this investigation emerged whilst researching for a previous assignment into child language, which will be discussed further in the literature review.
The majority of research into premature infants has focused on a sample where prematurity is not the only variable and the assessments have followed an assessment battery approach with the aim to gain a representative sample without extensive qualitative analysis. Briscoe et al (1998) used the Bus story (Renfrew, 1991) to assess narrative skills, Luoma et al (1998) used a variety of subsections from the CELF-3 (Semel, Wiig, and Secord, 1995), whilst picture naming tests, such as the Boston Naming Test (Kaplan, Goodglass, & Weintraub, 1983) have also been used to assess the receptive and expressive skills of a child born prematurely (as in Luoma et al, 1998: 47, 54; and Jansson- Verkasalo et al 2004 :1). Popular data and clinical tests used by therapists and clinicians illuminate the development of children's language, as well as possible differences. However the setting in which the tests are carried out may contribute negatively to the final results and therefore a naturalistic setting will be used in the current investigation. This will look to avoid the affect of unfamiliar environmental factors. The tests typically used to assess a child's language in a clinical setting also act as a means to assess individual aspects of language, such as expressive and receptive vocabulary, phonological working memory and ability to comprehend instructions and information. These areas are, of course, critical to look at in order to track a child's progress; however data may not be truthful in representation. The individuals character and how they react to unfamiliar people and situations may affect their response; with the child possibly being anxious to answer questions or ask for any necessary clarification.
Due to these reasons an analysis of naturally occurring speech using SALT (Miller and Chapman, 1985) will be used for the purpose of this investigation, with recordings being taken in the child's home environment. SALT stands for Systematic Analysis of Language Transcripts, and assesses language via a computer programme. The programme is designed to analyse transcripts which need to be manually coded to identify utterance types. SALT will allow a full representation of the child's every day language to be recorded and analysed with attention being paid to length of utterances, use of bound morphemes and frequently used verbs. Errors that may occur in the child's language, such as errors in the use of irregular verbs and plurals, can also be noted in SALT. These errors can often be classified as incorrect by clinical tests without identifying that the child may have a comprehensive understanding of the regular rules of language and be over-generalising these rules were irregular forms should be. Marking such responses as incorrect could consequently lead to the child being seen to have diminished linguistic ability, which does not necessarily represent their true abilities or correspond to normal development where such errors are common.
The study will commence with a review of literature into premature infants language, cognition and social abilities whilst also looking at the demographics and environment that the infants studied were exposed to daily. These factors will be taken into consideration with the subject of the current study with significant findings being commented on in the concluding discussion. The literature review will be followed by the methodology in which the procedure will be reviewed and a description of the subject given. Details of the subject will relate to their gestational age and other factors which the literature suggests may be significant in premature infants- such as medical history and genetic influences. From the methodology and subsequent reasoning the analysis and results of the investigation will be presented. The results will be compared to Fletcher's (1985) data on Sophie. The consequent discussion will then review the previous literature to assess whether the findings from previous studies into premature infants language abilities do, indeed, support the findings of the SALT analysis or whether the analysis will prove to be a relatively typical representation of a child aged 2; 6 speech.
L's parents collected twelve samples of L's speech over the four week period provided, at various times of day and within different contexts as summarised in table1.
These recordings ranged from approximately seven minutes to forty minutes. When attempting to transcribe the recordings it became clear that some of the samples were unsuitable due to there being too few utterances to replicate Fletcher's method, as discussed previously; or due to difficulty in deciphering the recordings due to L's range of pitch and interference from background noise within the home environment. Due to these limitations only seven transcripts were used in the investigation, as shown in table 2.
The transcription process proved difficult due to difficulty in interpreting what classifies an utterance. It was felt that each of L's turns should be classed as a new utterance, with pauses also acting as a break in L's turn and therefore being transcribed as separate utterances. Although this proved a difficult thing to identify, consistency within these categorisations is the determining factor.
Due to the investigation using Fletcher's data (1985) as a reference point, the analysis of L looked at the same features as had been used in the analysis of Sophie. The main focus of the results will be on MLU, TTR, VTTR, Brown's stages and bound morpheme usage. Types of utterances used in reference to the SALT transcript summaries and utterance codes will also be discussed. The results summary will list L's average scores, along with those of Sophie at 2;4 and 3;0 and will illustrate where L was ahead or behind Sophie at either, or both, of these ages. As L is 2;6 the expectation would be that she was achieving Brown's late stage 1 or early stage 2.
The data presented will follow the format presented in table 1. The results will be supported with evidence from the SALT analysis and L's relative strengths and weaknesses in reference to Sophie at 2;4 and 3;0 will be presented.