Referred to A&E by ambulance following scalds to the face and shoulder.
 She has she patches of partial thickness burns over her right arm. The depth of dermis lost is a function of the temperature and the duration of the exposure. It is crucial to the long term effects of the injury.
Ideas.  Her parents however blame themselves for her accident. They feel very guilty and express regret. The state that they should have been more vigilant although they rarely leave
 The parents are concerned that she will be left with scars and will be disfigured. They think this might lead to her being bullied when she goes to school.
 The parents expect the hospital and the staff will do the best they can for
1. Minor burns are comparable to abrasions, and there is no need for complicated treatments.
2. Keeping the burn clean is probably the most important aspect of care and can be done simply by washing with tap water and patting dry.
3. There is controversy over whether to leave blisters intact or not. However, there is also some evidence that draining or de-roofing blisters may increase the likelihood of the burn becoming infected. In practice, small or thick-walled blisters are often left intact, whereas large confluent or thin-walled blisters are usually drained.
4. Prophylactic systemic or topical antibacterials (e.g. Flamazine) are not indicated for minor burns. Antibiotics should only be used if infection is clinically present.
5. Exposing the burn to air or covering it with a dressing (non-adherent dressing or vapour-permeable film) are both reasonable options and depend on individual circumstances (e.g. the need to cover the burn to keep it clean).
6. Consider reviewing the person at 2-3 days, to reassess the condition of the burn and advise whether any further wound management is necessary (this may best be done by the practice or district nurse).
7. As the burn heals the use of an emollient may soothe and ease itching.
8. Pain relief with paracetamol is usually adequate. The addition of a weak opioid, such as codeine, may be useful for more severe pain.
She is being taken to