To carry our diazonium coupling reaction between a Diazonium Salt and phenol with reaction at the Reaction via an electrophilic aromatic substitution mechanism.
Diazonium coupling reactions are examples of electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions. In this experiment the diazonium salt is the electrophilic, which reacts with an electron rich nucleophile (phenol). This reaction occurs mostly in the para position however is can be facilitated in the ortho position by protecting groups placed in the para positions.
The product of this experiment, an Azo-coupled product are commonly used as dyes as the extended conjugation of the
Precautions to be taken, appropriate lab wear to be worn at all times including, lab coat, goggles, gloves and hair tied back. All work is to be carried out in the fume hood.
To begin anthranilic acid (1.7g) and distilled water (25ml) were mixed in a conical flask. Concentrated sulphuric acid (4ml) was then added whilst swirling the solution. The mixture was then warmed until the amine dissolved, and then cooled on ice until below 10oC. Following this Sodium nitrite (0.9g) and distilled water (10ml) were missed in a conical flask and cooled on ice until below 10 The sodium nitrite solution was then added to the amine solution, slowly and with swirling, ensuring the solution temperature did not exceed 10 Next Phenol (1.2g, 12.7 mol) and Sodium hydroxide solution (2.5M, 25ml) were heated together in a conical flask until the phenol dissolved. This solution was then cooled on ice until below 10 The mixture was then acidified with hydrochloric acid (4M) to PH1. This solution was then filtered at the pump, and washed with ice cooled water (3*10ml), leaving the crude products to dry under suction for 5 minutes. This product was followingly transferred to a conical flask and ice cold methanol (15ml) was added, the mixture was then swirled and filtered at the pump, leaving to dry under suction for a further 5 minutes, The yield and melting point were then taken and the product recrystalllised from methanol. The purified product was then weighed, a melting point taken and a TLC plate run (eluting the plate with a 1:1 toluene: ethyl acetate mix)
TLC analysis - Rf values 0.8 - product; our TLC plate was inconclusive and did not seem to develop properly.
Reaction mechanism to rationalise the formation of the Azo dye:
To begin substitution of hydrogen by NO2 through Nitration (reaction with concentrated Sulphuric acid and Nitric acid, at a temperature below 55oC)
To follow this reduction with h2/Ni, Nitro groups are deactivating and meta directing.
After this Nitrobenzene is reacted with concentrated sulphuric acid under reflux.
Finally Thionyl chloride is reacted with the reaction mixture; SOCl2; then (NH4)2CO2, an Amine source.