The aim of this experiment is to determine the concentration of F- in a series of metal fluoride solutions.
Electrochemical methods of analysis are based on the theory of galvanic cells. In a galvanic cell two electrode systems are interested into a medium of ions. The electrodes are then joined externally forming a circuit and the electron flow, which is established, causes a potential difference. This works on the theory of a spontaneous chemical reaction which sets up a potential difference, created by the 2 half reactions at each electrode. The electromotive force of the galvanic cell is dependant upon the difference between the potentials of the 2 electrodes. Cells are normally formed by combining a standard/reference electrode with an electrode whose potential or ionic behaviour is under study. Potential is dependant upon solution concentration therefore this technique can be used to determine concentrations via calibration plots of known concentrations.
The most used reference electrode is the calomel electrode; this is composed of mercury and mercurous chloride (calomel) in contact with a solution containing chloride ions (potassium chloride). The concentration of the chloride determines the absolute potential; the electromotive forces however are also dependant upon temperature.
The measuring electrode can be one of many types:
To begin a solution of NaF (0.1M) was taken and diluted to the following concentrations, 10mM, 1mM, 0.1mM, 0.01mM, and 0.001mM. This was achieved by using a pipette to transfer 10mL of the NaF solution into a 100mL volumetric flask, and diluted to volume. From this was then taken 10mL and further diluted to volume, and so on for the other concentrations (dilution by a factor of 10). Into separate beakers (Polythene, 100mL), labelled A-E was transferred 25mL of each of the standard solutions. Following this into polythene beakers labelled F-J was added 25mL of each metal fluoride solution (BaF 2, MgF 2, PbF 2, SrF 2, CaF 2), care was taken not to shake the saturated fluoride solution and the solution was pipette-ed from the top to avoid uptake of un-dissolved solid. To each of these polythene beakers was added 25.0mL of TISAB reagent, this was mixed well and subsequently placed in a thermostat-ed water bath, allowing the solution temperatures to equilibrate. Following this each solution was taken in turn and its potential difference measured. Electrodes were connected to the potentiometer, washed with distilled water and placed in the first standard solution (10mM), the potential was allowed to stabilised (around 1min) and the potential difference read. This was then repeated with the other standard solutions (B-E) and samples (F-J), washing the electrodes with distilled water between each measurement.