This essay shall examine the evolution of the goddess Isis in the Egyptian, Greek and Roman environments in an attempt to ascertain whether or not she can be categorized as being strictly Egyptian, Greek or Roman. In a similar manner; an attempt will be made to determine if Isis can be seen as an old or a new deity. The examination of her evolution over time shall be divided into a number of categories which are:
My sources for the investigation comprise of both classical texts by writers such as Herodotus and Plutarch in conjunction with Egyptian sources such as the Bremner-Rhind Papyrus and the Oxyrhynchus Papyri. I shall attempt to analyze the sources in chronological order to aid any patterns of evolution found. I shall begin with the Egyptian elements; depictions and accounts of Isis (or Aset/Auset as she was known in native Egyptian).
The account of the evolution of Isis in Egypt shall be kept short as it serves only as a common element of comparison upon which I shall base my discussion of her depictions in the Graeco-Roman world. My small selection of extracts from the various Egyptian texts is by no means exhaustive.
One of the reasons why Isis became as popular as she did throughout the ancient world was because, as Wilkinson Even within Egypt itself, Isis absorbed a number of goddesses before her cult spread throughout the Mediterranean. Wilkinson
Over the course of Egyptian History, the imagery of Isis did change and it is well worth observing the following transitions in her image. I have provided a number of images of Isis from Egypt from varying time periods; in order to show her gradual transformations that resulted in a template, which the Greeks and Romans incorporated. Image A Image B Isis has the characteristic crown on her head which also is the symbol used to spell her name in Egyptian. Finally the most recent image of the selection, E
From the images from Egypt alone it is clear that Isis evolved at least in terms of portrayal.
Now let us briefly examine references to Isis in a sample of Egyptian texts again from a variety of periods in Pharaonic Egyptian History. According to Wilkinson
She is mentioned about 114 times in the Coffin Texts Isis' protective role seems to be of a primary importance as she is described in a similar way to CT 775 in the Book of the Dead Corpus, BD 69
In the Bremner-Rhind Papyrus, Isis is called 'Mistress of the Universe, who came forth from the Eye of Horus'. This is a title that seems to have been continued in the Graeco-Roman descriptions, which are examined later in the investigation.
Now a selection of the Egyptian elements of Isis has been summarized briefly Firstly beginning with the Greeks; Isis was identified with both Io and Demeter Io gave birth to her son Epaphus by the Nile and Demeter who searched for her daughter Persephone. The identification with both Io
Even from this early stage in Greek History in the Fifth Century BC; Isis had been associated with Greek divinities. Herodotus also provides us with insightful information about the spread of the Isiac Cult during his era:
We must of course be aware that this could be a case of We also know that Isis had come to have a temple built for her at Athens in 333 BC due to a Greek inscription
It is interesting that Aphrodite is mentioned here because we have an image of Isis-Aphrodite
One of the events that probably enhanced the popularity of the goddess in the long term was Alexander's conquest of Egypt. Alexandria became one of the most important cities in the ancient world and according to Arrian
So how did the Greeks perceive Isis? Some of her attributes are given to us by Aesop. Dillery This is not as such a truly Egyptian attribute but similarities of Isis and the power over words can be seen in one of the Egyptian myths; namely the Secret Name of Ra For this reason it is not a radically new attribute conferred upon Isis and this may even be evidence that Isis remained very much the same as she spread across the Mediterranean.
From the Life of Aesop we find that Isis had the title 'Isis of the many names' ' Further evidence provided by Dillery
The reason for conferring such an attribute seems to be that Isis was associated with Hermes (Thoth; Djehuty in the Egyptian) who was the god of writing According to Plutarch This appears to be because the Ptolemies associated Isis with the constellation Virgo, which was thought by the Greeks to be Dike or Nemesis
So to summarize; the Greeks associated her with the Muses as well as a goddess who not only invented writing but language in general and gave it to both the Greeks and the so called Barbarian peoples. She was also associated with Justice which perhaps seems rather a new concept; if we consider that in Egypt Ma'at was the personification of justice
However; it seems that the most commonly widespread Egyptian myth concerning Isis was the Death of Osiris In fact the myth recorded by Plutarch, in my opinion, can show that any new attributes of Isis were thought by the Greeks and Romans to be her original ones from Egypt. So in their minds; little had changed about Isis from her worship in Egypt to her cults established in the Mediterranean. This I hope to demonstrate throughout the remainder of this essay.
I shall now focus the discussion on the rites and festivals performed on behalf of Isis. As this seems to form the best means of transition from Greek aspects to Roman aspects; as the rites are similar in both. Furthermore we have sources for the festivals performed over several different periods and focusing on Roman Isiac Cults before completing the analysis would rather disturb the fluidity of a chronological based method.
Let us now return to Herodotus who provides an account of the so called 'Festival of Lamps' which seems likely to have precedents for the processions described in the novel by Apuleius. The events at the Festival in Busiris and at Sais (probably on a national scale) are as follows:
I have attempted to find a similar festival within the official calendars of Egypt
It is by no means a match but I feel it is a strong candidate for one. Now let us compare the description given to us by Apuleius
Could there be a greater match between the accounts of Apuleius and Herodotus? Personally I feel that they both describe the same rite; perhaps the mythological reasoning behind the two cases is different but the ritual actions are seemingly identical. There is also another festival which I shall mention here This was celebrated on the 5 Essentially a procession lead down to the sea where a boat made in Egyptian style was loaded with offerings and cast out to sea. Turcan Williams The Navigium Isidis was based on Isis' wanderings in search of Osiris It is clear to see that the later rites associated with Isis are in fact based on this Egyptian myth.
So far we have found evidence to show that the Greek perceptions of Isis; which can be considered as 'new' ones; were based on an Egyptian myth. Now let us turn out attention to the Roman perceptions of Isis. We have a variety of opinions from both Roman sources and scholars; we shall begin with Cassius Dio writing in the Third Century AD:
In fact it seems we have a debate between two scholars concerning the popularity of Isis. Goodman One source about the public standing of the cult of Isis is from a statue in Ostia So I would be inclined to agree with Goodman.
Other sources concerning the Roman perceptions of Isis (namely her attributes) are Apuleius and also a papyrus from the Oxyrhynchite Nome in Egypt. Here are some of the attributes recorded in the account of Apuleius:
We also have two sources that reinforce the account of Apuleius which come from Egypt. The first is provided by Walbank It reads as follows:
Here we have Isis once again essentially addressed as ' Also found in Egypt, a papyrus from Oxyrhynchus seems to be a longer version of the passage found in Apuleius The implications show that not only were these titles attributes of the Romans but also those who worshipped Isis in Egypt. The papyrus is believed to predate Apuleius, being written in the early Second Century AD; whereas Apuleius wrote at the end of the Second Century AD.
The final aspect of this section is to examine the representations of Isis in Roman art. I have provided the Egyptian images and then a Greek one earlier with which we may compare the following two images. Image G
We have seen that the iconography of Isis changed considerably over time from the sample of images I have presented. She has evolved from the Egyptian Isis with the Aset crown to the infamous Isis with the solar disk and cow's horns; which she acquired from Hathor in the 18 She then was Hellenized as we saw in the image of Isis-Aphrodite and then Romanized with only the cow's horns signifying her identity.
In terms of her attributes, we saw that as Isis spread across the Mediterranean, she seemingly acquired new titles and was associated with a whole myriad of other deities. To mention a few she was assimilated with Hathor, Bast, Io, Demeter, Aphrodite, Dike, Hermes and Astarte.
So was Isis an old or new goddess? We can contrast the attributes from Pharaonic Egypt with those from the Oxyrhynchus Papyrus. Still in the Roman Period Isis is addressed as the wife of Osiris and mother of Horus; as well as the 'Mistress of the Universe'.
I believe that although the details in her iconography were adapted, the general identity and attributes of the goddess remained the same. From the beginning in Egypt she was known as 'Mistress of the Universe' and this title continued down into the account of Apuleius. Her festivals performed in Greece and Rome may not have been identical to those in Egypt but they were all based on the Death of Osiris Myth from Egypt, recorded in Plutarch.
However to use such terms 'old' or 'new' is not a valid procedure; as not only are such terms relative in usage but they are also force us to create a direct contrast that in the case of Isis and her 'evolution' does not apply. As the evidence shows she hardly changed at all.
Regarding the question of whether Isis was Egyptian, Greek or Roman; it would be fair to say that her origins and surrounding mythology was generally Egyptian; but it is misrepresentative to make such a simple statement. Such a question is dependant upon the worshipper; a Roman would have seen her as Egyptian, but a native Egyptian who witnessed the methods which the Roman worshipper used would not agree. It would perhaps be advisable to dispense with all these terms, old, new, Egyptian, Roman altogether.
It would be more precise to narrow the focus down to one particular period. For instance 'how Egyptian was Isis during the Hellenistic Age?' would be more suitable to determine the national identity of the goddess. Even then the Egyptian beliefs seem to have changed slightly since Pharaonic times to the Ptolemaic and Roman Periods; so using these terms is a hindrance.
In terms if her evolution; I would agree with Potter's
Therefore I would conclude that although Isis evolved over the course of time in terms of iconography; absorbing various national identities; she essentially remained the same in many core aspects.