Finley, (henceforth abbreviated to F.), has been acclaimed as a 'scholarly landmark' Such a claim is not exaggerated; the very fact that F. comments in the preface to his second edition that the work '
F. advocated that a close reading of both the In chapter 1, entitled Homer's techniques concerning the narration of myth are '
F.'s second chapter, Yet he is cautious to emphasize that when reading the poems in the proposed fashion, the reader must be constantly aware of the temptation to '
The next three chapters then begin to concentrate on a variety of social elements, such as the economic centres (chapter 3), community and kin (chapter 4) and moral values (chapter 5). F. states that the Associated with the Both of these crucial elements played a vital role in interactions within the local community As F. states, '
One aspect of family life that I admit shocked me was the relationship between husband and wife in F.'s account. F. contrasts extracts depicting the emotional reaction between men and between a man and a woman. The results of his inquiry led F. to write, '
F.'s treatment of the Homeric religion did not meet with my total approval. It is quite possible that I have misinterpreted F. on this occasion, namely on his account of the evolution of Greek religion He asserts that the humanization of the gods and the abandonment of the older divine forms was a rapid process, akin to a revolution. F. takes for granted, in my opinion, that we are unable to prove that humanization of the gods occurred around the time of Homer. It is perfectly possible that this had already taken place in earlier phases of Greek civilization. The evidence, however, of such an occurrence is lacking, statues from older temples may well have perished and the Linear B tablets were not concerned with the recording of myth. This does not mean to say that humanization of the gods could not have happened in this period.
There has been much scholarly debate concerning F.'s thesis. Hornblower states that F. has been attacked on two counts, firstly, that there was never a single or coherent society in the Homeric period and secondly, his preferred dating of this society is wrong The second charge is countered by F. in his first appendix, where he remarks ' '
Overall I believe that F. produced a work that will continue to cause debate. Even though I have my reservations about the validity of employing two sources, the relationship with each other is still debated, to construct a society such as F. has achieved, his style is such that I am quite prepared to follow him in his leap of faith and only at the last moment do I mentally apply the brakes and halt, looking down at the chasm that is Homeric scholarship, murky and teaming with pitfalls and dangers. Such is F.'s power to convince. F.'s work is enlightening both in terms of the application of source material and the combination of classics with other disciplines, which his publication was one of the first of this kind.