The reaction between Bromate (BrO At a specific point in the reaction, the solution goes from pink to colourless. This property will be used to calculate the activation energy of the reaction, by conducting the experiment at temperatures between 20 and 70C and producing an arrhenius plot of the results.
Previous experiments have indicated that the rate-determining step for this reaction is between the Br- ions and an intermediate H
If step (3) is rate determining:
Research has indicated that this step results in the formation of Br
As the concentration of H
Substituting for[HBrO
substituting for [BrO
Substituting for [HBrO
Substituting for [H
at very low concentrations of H+:
so that [BrO
substituting for [Br(V)] in (Expression IV) gives :
Where k = k
This indicates that the reaction is fourth order overall, second order with respect to H+, and first order with respect to BrO
The aim of this experiment is to determine the activation barrier for the reaction between Bromate and Bromide ions and give an estimate of the uncertainty in this value.
Four sets of boiling tubes were prepared as described below and placed in the thermostat to equilibriate at each temperature.
When the solutions had reached the correct temperature, the contents of tube 1 was poured into tube 2 and shaken to mix. From when the solutions are mixed the time taken for the pink colour to disappear was recorded. The experiment was conducted at 5C intervals between 20 and 70C. The time taken for the pink colour to disappear was recorded.
From integration of the rate law for first order rate law (below) and the rate constant (k) can be expressed in terms of the time taken for the reaction to reach a specific point (t) and the concntration of product at this point [A]
As the concentration of [A] Substituting for k in the Arrhenius equation gives:
Where A is the pre exponential factor, E
This shows that a plot of lnt against 1/T will give a straight line, of gradient Ea/R.
The true value calculated from the 31 values contributed by other groups isn't very close to the value calculated from the value obtained from this experiment alone. This is may be due to a difference in opinion as to the exact point at which the solution had gone colourless. This is the chief source of error for this experiment, especially at higher temperatures where the reaction occurred very fast. In this experiment the same person decided the point at which the solution had turned colourless to minimise this source of error, however other groups may have had a different perception of when the solution was colourless. Using a colorimeter to determine when the solution was colourless would eliminate this error by selecting a specific absorbance to signify the 'end' of the reaction.
This difference accounts for the large amount of uncertainty in the value for the entire class, nearly 20% of the true value found. Ideally, the experiment would be repeated many more times, using a colorimeter as described above to reduce the uncertainty.
Often the colour change would happen more rapidly towards the bottom of the tube than at the top, even though the tube was shaken throughout the experiment to reduce this. Using a machine to agitate the solution would be much more effective than shaking it by hand.
The accuracy of these results could also be improved by reducing the delay between mixing the solutions and starting the stopwatch and between the colour change occurring and stopping the stopwatch. This could be done by using continuous flow equipment to mix the solutions and measure the time taken for the colour to change.
The activation energy for this reaction was found to be 51.59 kJmol