"Every contract entails a free agreement, but not every agreement results in a contract." While both possess the elements of Offer and Acceptance, the key difference lies in the presence of 'Consideration' and 'Intention to create Legal Relations' which transforms agreements into contracts. Both these doctrines, although established concepts of English Contract Law, have their critics and supporters. While Treitel However, it is contended that English Contract Law can survive without consideration as Intention can perform its functions.
The doctrine of consideration is a "body of rules...the function of which is to put some limits on the enforceability of agreements in law." The traditional definition accrues a benefit to the promisor and a detriment to the promisee. It is also considered an 'exchange' model However, in the 18 Lord Mansfield believed that consideration was only a means through which one could ascertain the party's Intention to enter into a contract and this, if possible in any other way, would render it unnecessary.  He advocates that consideration should only be a reason for a promise rather than vital to its enforcement. In  So, why despite criticism, does consideration survive as a legitimate test for contractual liability?
There have been many developments in the doctrine of consideration fundamental to its survival in Contract Law. While these do not affect bilateral contracts (a promise for a promise) where consideration is easily established, they have profound influence in unilateral ones (a promise for an act) where contractual intention might come into play as consideration becomes difficult to ascertain. In  If the traditional definition had been applied in this case, the claimant's action would fail, as there was no detriment to either party illustrating the flexibility of the courts with regard to consideration. Its ill effects are also taken care of by the principle of Equity. Consideration performs three main functions- dealing with the problems of evidence and establishing contracts, ensuring the enforceability of promises, and providing courts with a tool to strike out various promises based on public policy. In bi-lateral commercial contracts, consideration rather than Intention is of importance. However, when considering domestic and social agreements, Intention is given priority over consideration. If there is a breach brought before a court of law, both Intention and consideration play an important role in deciding the validity of the contract. Thus, despite all criticism, consideration continues to survive as a test to ensure contractual liability. However, Intention to create legal relations is considered superfluous next to consideration despite the crucial role it plays in determining contractual liability.
Experts believe that as Intention is intertwined with consideration, its existence as an independent element is unnecessary. However, it can coexist with consideration contrary to the belief that it is only a 'good substitute' if "consideration were ever abolished" In a unilateral contract, as per Lord Denning, acceptance of an offer through action can be considered a party's Intention to create legal relations rather than consideration for the offer.   The courts, therefore, began to give importance to Intention as one of the factors essential for contracts.
Intention to create legal relations becomes essential in agreements where courts do not 'wish to have jurisdiction' These include family, social, government, and collective labour agreements. Contractual intention, although important in domestic agreements, is sometimes difficult to establish. In  This is also evident in  Therefore, the general presumption is against creating legal relations in family arrangements. However, in  Courts also give importance to contractual intention in family business as in John G Snelling Ltd. In social arrangements, contractual intentions come into play when validating contracts. In    However, this can be rebutted if e.g. an honorary clause is inserted within contracts proving that the parties did not intend to create legal relations, as in  Therefore, Intention to create legal relations is a valuable principle in Contract Law and not superfluous.
Both consideration and Intention to create legal relations are important principles of English Contract Law. Although sometimes overlapping, they are 'doctrinally distinct' Consideration plays a greater role in making and enforcing contracts whereas Intention is fundamental when viewing domestic, social, and some commercial agreements. It is argued that absence of consideration may provide a 'simpler' and 'more realistic explanation' than Intention; however, sometimes the later "may best capture the spirit of decision(s)"