Aquaponics, the integration of aquaculture and hydroponic crop production represents a more environmentally benign and energy efficient method of production than each method practiced in isolation.
This study sought to ascertain the viability of aquaponics as an alternative to conventional hydroponics when producing lettuce (Lactuca sativa) cv. 'Trinity'. Three treatments produced lettuce in recirculating systems in four trials between August and December 2006. Control treatments supplied the plants with a full spectrum of nutrients, whilst two aquaponic treatments supplied the plants with water from cold-water aquariums containing either solely goldfish (Carassius auratus), or from identical goldfish aquariums with additional iron (FeEDTA) at two parts per million. The final trial examined the effects of fish stocking density.
Growth rate and leaf chlorophyll content were measured to examine the effects of each treatment. Tissue analysis of dried leaf tissue from the second and fourth trials ascertained mean N, P and K concentrations in leaf tissue for each treatment.
Statistical analysis showed significantly lower growth rates in both aquaponic treatments compared with the control in the initial three trials. In trial 4, no significant differences were observed in growth rates. Leaf chlorophyll concentration was significantly different to across treatments in one trial and leaf tissue analysis showed some differences in N, P and K concentrations across the three treatments in one trial.
The study ascertained that lettuce variety 'Trinity' may grow in an aquaponic system at rates comparable to conventional hydroponics, as long as fish stocking densities are high enough.
This trial was designed to compare growth rates and tissue composition of lettuce (Lactuca sativa) grown using a commercial mix hydroponic nutrient solution with lettuce grown in water taken from a cold-water aquarium. Hydroponic crops obtain their total nutrient requirement from soluble inorganic salts whilst aquaculture generally discharges nutrient-rich wastewater to maintain fish health (Lucas &amp; Southgate, 2002). Aquaponics is the integration of recirculating aquaculture and hydroponic crop production (Rackocy, 2004) and mirrors the natural process of nitrogen uptake that would occur in an aquatic ecosystem; the fish waste acting as a nutrient-source for the plants, which, in turn remove unwanted products from the aquaculture system (fig. 1.1).
The design of the systems used in this project is loosely based around the work published in 2004 by Lennard and Leonard: a continuous-flow lettuce production system. These systems will however also draw from the work of Malcolm (Backyard Aquaponics 2006), whose grow beds contain expanded clay aggregate.
The design of the systems proved robust enough to support the growth of both lettuce and fish. Only two fish were lost over the period of the project, and those surviving approximately doubled in size over the duration of the project with no symptoms of disease. The plants were able to remove nutrients from the aquaria water and, where enough fish were present to produce sufficient nutrients, growth rates were comparable to the control treatment. The increasing electro-conductivity of the aquaria water, did however suggest that some dissolved nutrients were not being removed in the aquaponic systems at the rate at which they were being produced. This may have resulted from the lack of faeces removal, and its subsequent mineralization. The pH of the water in all aquaponic systems followed a downward trend over the project, this resulted from the action of nitrifying bacteria, the dissolution of CO 2 from fish respiration in tank water to form carbonic acid, and also from the bacterial breakdown of faeces and uneaten food to form other organic acids (Randall no date). It is fair to assume that longer-term aquaponic projects of this nature may require the addition of buffers to mitigate this acidification.
The use of domestic goldfish in this project necessitated low densities of fish per unit volume of water. The size of the fish in the trial was not closely monitored, however those surviving until the end of the project had approximately doubled in size. One of these fish, which appeared to be representative of an average size at the end of the project was weighed. A unit weight of 18.7g was recorded, meaning that the total weight of fish in each tank during trials 1-3 and trial 4 equated to 2.14kg m -3 and 4.27kg m -3 respectively. When compared to commercial stocking densities up to 17 kg m -3 in the UVI systems and up to 100kg m -3 in super-intensive aquaculture systems (Lucas &amp; Southgate 2003) the aquaponic crop growth rates observed in this project, especially in trials 2 and 4 must be seen as encouraging. The brands of fish food used during the project contained approximately 40% protein. In turn, proteins consist of around 16% nitrogen (Wurts, 2005). In a commercial system, where the food conversion ratio of a fish species is known, it is possible to estimate how much protein will be converted to fish biomass and how much will enter the water as ammonia. However, these calculations can be further complicated when the conversion of ammonia to nitrates is considered, with the rate of nitrification being dependent upon water temperature, pH and dissolved oxygen (DO) concentration (Stickney 2005).
The growth of plants in the aquaponic treatments was up to ten times lower than the control plants in the first three trials. In addition, appearance of the plants in these treatments during the first trial suggested some nutrient deficiencies; the leaves of the plants were thicker and more brittle than those in the control treatment. Their dark green appearance and the generally stunted growth was consistent with a phosphorus deficiency (Jones 1997; Salisbury and Ross 1992). As aquaria nitrate concentrations did not rise above 40 ppm during the first three trials, it is also reasonable to suggest this low rate of growth was also significant of nitrogen deficiency. It is worthy of note, however, that no chlorosis was observed, often apparent in plants starved of nitrogen (ibid).
Other than the above, there were no other outward signs of mineral deficiencies. The use of mains water, which contains traces of both macro- and micro-nutrients (Thames Water 2005) (Appendix 3), twinned with the lack of solids-removal may help to explain this. Leaf tissue analysis of plants from the aquaponic treatments in trials 2 and 4 showed concentrations of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium in the normal range for lettuce (Jones 2003). Whilst leaf concentrations of phosphorus and potassium are good indicators of the levels of these elements available to the plant, excess available nitrogen can lead to 'luxury uptake' (Greenwood et al 1980). It is worth noting that in the final trial, the aquaponic treatment showed higher leaf tissue concentrations of nitrogen than the control treatment, presumably because the nitrate levels in this treatment did not fall as rapidly as those in the control, exposing the plants to more nitrogen over the 21 days. In temperate zones where there are periods of low light during the year, the propensity for leafy salads to store excess nitrogen as NO 3- means that lettuce are routinely tested for nitrate concentration (Assured Produce 1997). The possibility of higher nitrate concentrations in aquaponically-produced lettuce may therefore be in need of further investigation.
Root to shoot ratio in the second and third trials were higher in the aquaponics treatments than in the control, suggesting a lack of available nutrients. Salisbury &amp; Ross (1992) imply that this is most indicative of low nitrogen availability, which is borne out by low recorded NO 3- concentrations in the fish tanks of these treatments during these trials compared to the control tanks. Low levels of root production in the aquaponic treatments in trial 1 may also be indicative of low phosphorus availability at that early stage in the project.
Small necrotic spots surrounded by a yellow halo were also observed on the plants from the aquaponic treatments (Figure 3.21), which was identified as an early infection of Xanthomonus campestris (Agrios 2005). Whilst necrotic lesions can also be indicative of magnesium deficiency, the symptoms were not confined to inter-venal regions, and thus the initial diagnosis was accepted. The control plants did not show any sign of such infection, one possible reason being the vigour with which they were growing.
The brown appearance of the roots of plants from the aquaponic treatments in the second trial would seem to suggest that there may have been at least some occurrence of anoxic pockets of water within the substrate, causing root death. Sampling of the dissolved oxygen in the irrigation water (when the water temperature was 17 C) showed levels of approximately 8mg l -1. This is within the desired range for freshwater aquaria and well above the minimum levels acceptable for good growth in hydroponic crops (Goto et al 1996). Continuous flow systems through a substrate can lead to the water taking a 'path of least resistance' through the particles with some areas flooded but not moving. In such areas, denitrification (nitrate reduced to nitrogen gas) can even occur. Such a phenomenon would perhaps explain why some root tissue appeared necrotic. The root systems of these plants tended also to trap solid fish excreta and hence impede the flow of oxygenated water past the roots, possibly another reason for the root death. Dense root mats can be problematic in conventional Nutrient Film Technique (NFT) hydroponics where they can also starve themselves of oxygen by reducing solution penetration into the root mass (Jones 1997)
The fluctuations in nitrate content of the aquaria water during the first three trials would appear to suggest that the fish stocking rates and hence feed input were insufficient to produce the amount of nitrogen required by the plants. However, during the third trial, nitrate levels remained at 40 ppm for the entire trial. During this period (early October) day temperatures in the glasshouse were noticeably lower than in previous trials (Appendix 4). The corresponding fall in water temperature in the aquaria may have reduced the feeding rate of the fish, meaning less protein from the food was converted to fish biomass and more uneaten food may have merely decomposed than in previous trials. The lower temperatures also corresponded to lower rates of plant growth, and thus less demand for nitrogen, although nitrate concentrations in the control systems did fall in line with the two previous trials.
Higher growth rates (although not significantly) were observed in the aquaponic + Fe treatments in the first two trials but not in the third. Furthermore, only in the second trial did the addition if iron to the aquaponic systems have a significant effect on leaf chlorophyll content. The addition of iron did not therefore appear to have any consistent significant effect during the project.
Plants are able to grow well in soilless systems where mineral concentrations are as low as those in soil solutions, as long as the nutrients can be replenished at a comparable rate to their uptake (Salisbury and Ross 1992). This continual renewal is central to the success of an aquaponic system, where levels of nitrate, for example remain much lower than those found in conventional hydroponics. From a fish-rearing perspective, treatment of aquaculture effluents are seen as problematic, especially in open systems, as the large volume flows carry relatively dilute nutrients (Adler et al 2000). Rackocy (no date) and Lennard (2004) have demonstrated the ability of aquaponic systems to produce leafy herbs when nitrate levels are as low as 40 ppm. It is theoretically possible to match nutrient production to nutrient uptake (at least for nitrogen) and thus for aquaponic systems to reach a nutrient equilibrium (Lennard 2004).
Plant scientists generally acknowledge the possibility that organic compounds such as vitamins can have a positive effect on plant growth (Salisbury and Ross 1992). The importance of chelating agents in the uptake of nutrients, especially relatively immobile ones, is also widely known, and in soils it is known that these chelating agents are often of microbial origin (ibid). Commercially available bio-stimulants for use in soilless systems aim to enhance inorganic nutrient uptake in a similar way and indeed, Vernieri et al (2006) proved the capability of one such substance to maintain yields of rocket (Eruca sativa) when the nutrient content in a hydroponic system was reduced to 25% of normal levels.
In aquaponic systems, the understanding of the action of micro-organisms in the production of bio-stimulants is growing. The action of micro-organism-derived chelating agents as well as humic compounds from the breakdown of solid waste may well be a key factor in the success of aquaponics. Savidov (2006 cited in Wilson 2006) has highlighted the need for aquaponic systems to 'mature' in order to produce economic crop yields. The speed at which the system reaches this maturity would obviously be important to any business application of the technique. The aquaponic systems in this project began to produce comparable yields to the hydroponic control after approximately four months of operation. The decision not to remove solid fish waste may have been important in achieving this as the organic particles can act as carriers for bacteria and other beneficial micro-fauna (Kolkovski et al 2003)
Aquaculture-derived manure has been cited as a useful slow-release fertiliser (Westerman et al 1993). Naylor et al (1999) analysed fresh trout-farm manure, finding levels of nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium and magnesium (Mg) on a dry-weight basis comparable with cattle, poultry and swine manures.
The amount of solid particles present in the system is also linked to the dissolved oxygen concentration, with the aerobic breakdown of excreta and uneaten food increasing the amount of oxygen removed from the water. This is the main reason why systems that are intensively stocked with fish, such as that of the UVI, remove solids (Rackocy no date).
Over the project as a whole, there were much lower levels of water use in the aquaponic systems. Whilst the control systems required a 100% water change between trials as well as supplementary water to replace that lost through evapotranspiration, the aquaponic systems only required the latter. Each aquaponic system thus used approximately 75% less water than the control.
The project demonstrated the ability of aquaponic systems to produce lettuce (Lactuca sativa cv. 'Trinity') using goldfish (Carassius auratus) aquaria as the nutrient source albeit at a slower rate than the control hydroponic treatment. The rate at which lettuce can be produced in these systems related directly to the amount of food added to the aquatic portion of the systems, which would normally be in direct relation to the stocking density of the fish used.
Although the hydroponic control treatments produced a greater crop yield in three of the four trials, it is worth considering the amount of water used and the cost in terms of financial outlay for the inorganic nutrients and in terms of the energy used to produce these chemicals. Aquaponic systems also have the advantage of producing two saleable products and, as has been demonstrated in the United States, the possibility of generating further income from agri-tourism.
Although there are obvious benefits to producing crops using aquaponic systems, the likelihood of commercial-scale aquaponic production occurring in the UK in the near future must be seen as unlikely. It is possible however, that large increases in energy costs and restrictions on water use and pollution discharge may make such techniques more important in years to come.
It was apparent towards the end of this project that the expanded clay aggregate bio-filters/grow-beds were not large enough to cope with 5 months of goldfish faeces. It became necessary during the later trials to periodically remove the plug at the end of the irrigation hose to remove some solids from the pipe. Larger, deeper bio-filters would therefore enable the retention of more soild waste and possibly, therefore higher concentrations of micronutrients and micro-organisms. Lennard and Leonard (2006) assessed the comparative abilities of gravel bed, floating raft and NFT hydroponic systems to remove fish-derived nutrients in an aquaponics system, concluding gravel beds worked most efficiently. Combinations of grow-bed volume and various substrates could therefore be trialled along with the removal or retention of fish faeces.
Now suggested as being an important factor in aquaponic systems, populations of water borne micro flora and micro fauna take some time to establish. Savidov (2006 in Wilson 2006) has suggested that for populations of these organisms to reach useful size may take up to twelve months, and that from that point forward aquaponics can outperform conventional hydroponics in terms of crop yield. A full investigation of these theories is currently under way by Savidov (Wilson 2006), however the limited time-scale for this project must be cited as a major limiting factor in view of these preliminary hypotheses. Possibly, future research could assess the effects of commercially-available plant boistimulants in aquaponics where 'virgin' aquaculture systems are used to provide crop nutrition.
Finally, the increasing need to reduce energy consumption also presents the possibility of using warm water fish production alongside glasshouse crops to store excess heat during periods of high temperatures to reduce the need for night-time heating.