Seed quality includes both vigour and viability of seeds. During seeds storage, seed quality deteriorates and the loss in both viability and vigour demonstrates this deterioration in seed quality. In this experiment the effect of two main factors, temperature and seeds moisture content during storage, on the loss in vigour and viability in pea (Pisum sativum L.) seeds was examined. This was carried out by storing the pea seeds at two temperatures and two moisture contents and testing seed viability and vigour after various storage periods. Viability was measured by germinating the seeds and counting the number of normal and abnormal seedlings (ISTA, 1979). Vigour was estimated as the electrical conductivity of water in which seeds had been soaked for 24 hours (ISTA, 1995).
The pea seeds at 13.5 and 15.7% moisture contents were divided into various lots and then pre-packed into laminated aluminium foil packets to maintain the seed moisture content during storage. These packets were then stored for various periods at different temperatures (Table 1). After storage treatment, packets were stored at 3 C to prevent further deterioration before germination and vigour tests.
Although all the constants, KE, CW, C2, in Equation 4 were tentatively estimated and in theory, Equation 4 could be used to predict pea seeds longevity in any temperatures and moisture contents, however, caution must be taken.
CW estimation was base on only 2 moisture contents, 15.7 and 13.5 % and a two points interpolation can only give an approximate estimation. Also, no data were available outside these moisture contents in this experiment and extrapolation of CW could easily lead to erroneous results. In actual fact, Ellis et al. (1989) demonstrated that as moisture content lower, there would come to a limit to the logarithm relationship between seed moisture and longevity. For pea seeds, Ellis et al. (1989) suggested that this critical moisture content is around 6.2 %, and lowering of moisture content below this critical point will not improve longevity. Conversely, as moisture content increases, there will be a point where free water become available inside the seeds and Equation 4 longevity model no longer hold.
The temperature term in Equation 4 is a simplification from the original term in Equation 2, which shows that relationship between logarithmic of longevity and temperature is not linear. Equation 4 is only an approximation on Equation 2 over a small range in temperatures. Similar to moisture content, any extrapolation of longevity from 50 C or 40 C to sub-zero temperature using Equation 4 is very likely to give erroneous results. Moreover, C2 in Equation 4 was tentatively estimated by using just one single result at 40 C, and this value is subject to substantial error.
Graph 2 shows there is a negative correlation between seed steeped water electrical conductivity (vigour) and probit percentage viability. However, this relationship would not be obvious if linear percentage scale was used to plot Graph 2 and this is even more if viability is very high. Small changes in viability are subjected to sampling error and difficult to detect. Even when detected, the very small drop in viability would seem rather insignificant when compare with the increases in electrical conductivity or decrease in vigour, and this would make vigour and viability appear to be independent. This also shows the important of using either electrical conductive vigour test or seed storage aging germination test when trying to estimate the quality of a seed lot. If only a single germination test was used to estimate the seed quality without aging, an apparent non-significant drop in germination would have a significant effect on the seeds longevity.
Graph 1 shows the viability and normal seedlings curves with the same storage temperature and seeds moisture contents are almost parallel and this implies every individual seed would go through similar period of time between at the point of losing the ability to produce normal seedlings and death, no matter when this process take place (this also implies the 2 curves would give similar CW). In the case of storage temperature at 50 C with 15.5 % moisture content, this period is about 2.8 days and 5.4 days for 13.5 % moisture content. This shows the length of this period is affected by the seeds storage environment, harsher environment would give shorter period and gentler environment would give longer period. However, the height difference of the two curves would always be the same, which is the difference of seed lot constant, Ki between viable seeds and normal seedlings survival curves. As the high differences between the two curves in probit percentage scale are the same through out storage period, this implies number of seeds, which produce abnormal seedlings, will be highest when viability is near 50%. Also, the storage conditions would not affect the percentage of abnormal seedling at a particular viability when the same seed lot go through deterioration in storage (i.e. two lots of seed originally taken from the same seed lot and stored in different temperatures and moisture contents, as long as the final viability is similar, they would have similar percentage of abnormal seedlings in germination tests).
There should be more replicated samples in the germination test. As 3 replicates of 40 seeds were a relatively small sample size when one try to observe small changes in viability often less that 1%. As probit percentage of viability data from the shorter storage periods (data near the Y - axis) shown, they were subjected to a lot of noise. The germination test would also be more effective, if there were more samples taken around the periods when viability was near 50%, as this would improve the accuracy for the estimation of standard deviation of the frequency distribution of seed deaths, .
Before any tests were carried out on the seeds, it might be beneficial to humidify the seeds first, as this might avoid the possibility of imbibition damage during rehydration. Germination test were carried out in relatively dark environment and the seedlings showed sign of etiolation and this made checking of normal germination more difficult, as no normal chlorophyll pigment developed in the seedlings.
Despite of all the shortcomings in this experiment, the estimated value of CW, 4.3 to 5.0 is similar when compares with other published value, 5.39 suggested by Ellis et al. (1989). This probably shows the robustness of the underlying philosophy behind the testing method and theory about seeds longevity.