Both Although they appear in the same geographical region, the two species generally grow in different sites.  This project is to investigate whether soil salinity is a determining factor for both
A site was chosen in a valley near La Joya, just over 1 km south of Las Negras (see the attached map). The site is relatively flat that makes access and survey easier and it has a mix population of The soil is calcareous alkaline and the altitude of the site is some where between 50 to 100 m above sea level and about 100 m from the coast. Survey was carried out on twenty (5 rows by 4 columns) 5x5 square-meter quadrats. The orientation of the quadrats is shown in Figure 1 and micro-relief of the area was estimated by eyes (Figure 2).
For each quadrat, the number of individual Two soil samples were taken in two opposite corners for each quadrat.
As some However, there were a few plants that were too small to identify and they were ignored in the survey.
In order to obtain the salinity data of the soil samples, we need to have information about soil moisture content of the samples. To measure soil moisture content, samples of around 50 g of weighted moist soil were put in the oven at 60 The different in weight between the moist soil sample and dry soil sample is the water content in the soil.
For the soil salt content, 10.0 g of moist soil samples were mixed with 50 ml of de-ionized water to dissolve the salt from the soil sample into the water, a Primo conductivity meter was used to measure the soil steeped water conductivity. Detail of procedure of salinity calculation is in Appendix 2.
The salt measure method in this experiment is only approximate as other ions would be present in the soil, (e.g. potassium, nitrate, phosphate and sulfate ions) and they could affect the overall conductivity in the soil steeped water and give a higher reading in the conductivity meter than it would be if sodium and chloride were the only ions in the water. The calculated salinity values could be over estimated. Also, as there seems to be little variation in salinity between quadrats (Graph 1), but substantial variation in salt level between soil samples within some quadrats (e.g. C4, D2 and D3), it would be better if more soil samples were taken from each quadrats as getting accurate salinity data is very important for this project for all the results and interpretation of them are based on the salinity values, however, due to constraint in resources (time and equipment), this was not possible. It also might be better if more than one site was surveyed, as this might lead to bigger variation in soil salinity and more drastic changes in plants population and coverage.
When there were no flowers or florescence on the plants, it was very difficult to distinguish between Plants that were too small to identify were ignored. All these could introduce error in the survey data. Also, percentage of coverage was estimated by eyes and this could be very subjective. In order to be more consistent, coverage estimation was done by the same person through out the project. Even counting number of plants could run into problem, sometime it was difficult to tell how many plants were there in a large clump, where did an individual plant start and end?
There appears to be no correlation between plant number and percentage of area coverage for This could be due to the size of Which data, plant number or percentage of area coverage, to use as an indication of population changes can be difficult to decide. As in this case, they can give a very different picture.
 This apparent contradiction could be due to high variation in the number of However, caution must be taken for all the
Moisture content in the soil could be another factor that determine which species is more dominant in a particular area. Number of
To conclude, Salt could be the determining factor for However, salt level seems to have little effect on