Vince, an employee working at a building site operated by BloggsBuild Limited, died after falling from the third story of scaffolding. His death can be attributed to manslaughter by gross negligence on the part of individuals or organization to maintain a safe working environment. The facts of the case indicate that Mr. Bloggs, Managing Director and majority shareholder of BloggsBuild Limited, visited the site only occasionally. Malcolm, the site manager, took all decisions regarding the site and permitted Colin, a dangerous driver, to operate the crane- the immediate cause of Vince's death.
Recklessness has been replaced by 'gross negligence' as the mens rea required for manslaughter following the decision of It identified that once breach of duty is established, the jury must go on to consider whether the defendant's breach caused the death of the victim and whether the conduct was of such seriousness that placed the life or health at risk, to amount to gross negligence given the circumstances. Against this background, one can consider Malcolm liable since his conduct maybe seen as the main cause of Vince's death and may be serious enough to establish gross negligence manslaughter. However, the principle of fair labeling is concerned to see that distinctions between kinds of offences and degrees of wrongdoing are respected and punished proportionately.
Since the 1990s, English Law attributes liability to companies to the same extent as person although, in focusing on corporate criminal liability, there is a danger of overlooking individual fault and responsibility. However, effectiveness of this doctrine limits corporate criminal liability to small organizations, as there have been only 3-4 successful prosecutions for corporate manslaughter, Since only Mr. Kite and his wife ran the company, However, with increase in organizational structure, it becomes difficult to identify any one 'brain of the company', as was in
The field of corporate criminal liability is a relatively new arrival to the criminal law without which companies might escape regulations and individuals may be prosecuted for faults of the company. This has forced the government to rethink corporate crime.
As a response to inadequacies in the field of corporate liability, the government has endorsed the proposals outlined by the Law Commission Report No. 237. This would hold accountable BloggsBuild Limited for Vince's death under the new offence of corporate killing without need to identify the conduct of any particular individual. BloggsBuild Limited should have ensured adherence to Health and Safety Regulation through frequent checks and visits. Malcolm's conduct or Colin's negligence has no influence with regard to corporate liability under the new proposals although they can still remain individually liable separate from the corporation. This criterion also affects unincorporated organizations
The proposed new offence of corporate killing does not increase or decrease individual liability but merely provide a different basis of criminal liability for corporations. The Law Commission "intended corporate killing to be exclusively a corporate crime, lacking any direct punitive consequences of individual". The mens rea required for reckless killing is, that the individual was aware of the risk that his conduct could cause death or serious injury and consequently, it would be unreasonable to take the risk attracting a maximum penalty of life imprisonment. Colin may be guilty of killing by gross carelessness, as the reasonable man would have known that dangerous operation would entertain the risk of death or serious injury. Malcolm would be guilty of the more serious offence of reckless killing as given his position as site manager; he would have known that his decisions and conduct would cause risk of death or serious injury. If he is not convicted of reckless killing, Malcolm may be disqualified from work under the offence of 'substantial contribution' to corporate killing.
Eventhough, the Law Commission's aim for the proposals is to make corporations more accountable in law where death results due to management failure; they may have some gaps that require consideration. The commission has not extended its new doctrine 'management failure' to offences, which require subjective 'awareness'. They fail to take into account that corporate intentionality is projected through their policy. It would be difficult for the jury to consider, implicitly or explicitly, how the particular company 'could have been aware' or even the correct definition of 'corporate awareness'. Fines still remain the chief penalty for corporate liability, which companies can regain from consumers.
The key difference between the current law and the changes proposed under the Law Commission is crucial for not only this case but also the field of corporate liability. If the proposed changes are adopted, the scope of corporate liability will widen to encompass both corporation and individuals distributing culpability in equal proportions for Vince's death. However, what remains fundamentally unchanged is that such questions of fact are for the jury to decide.