Maternally expressed genes are essential for the correct patterning and cell-fate determination in the early The PAR proteins and MEX-5/6 are responsible for initial polarisation of the zygote, This review describes the current understanding of these molecular mechanisms in the specification of cell fates in the pregastrulation embryo.
The potential of This free-living soil nematode is ideal for studying in the laboratory as it has a rapid period of embryogenesis (16 hours) and each worm has an invariant cell lineage, with exactly 959 somatic cells in the adult, which can be easily traced during development through the transparent cuticle (Sulston & Horvitz, 1977).  The predominant adult form is hermaphroditic, containing both sperm and eggs and therefore reproduction is rapid, either by self-fertilization or by cross-fertilization with the rare males.
The genetics for It has a small genome at 8 x 10 It was the first multicellular organism for which the genome was completely sequenced ( , 2000). Specific mutants may be produced by targeted deletion through transposon insertion or mutagens. Embryos may be manipulated by transformation or injection with transgenes and marker proteins such as green fluorescent protein (GFP) are easily visualised in the transparent embryos. RNA interference (RNAi) is a particularly useful technique for studying maternal effect genes by eliminating the expression of specific maternal or zygotic genes in offspring.
Patterning in the early embryo is a result of the complex interaction between oriented asymmetric divisions and cell-cell interactions. For example, the P1 cell is able to develop autonomously in the absence of AB, but the daughters of AB require interactions from the descendents of P1 - the EMS and P2 blastomeres. Proper development of the EMS blastomere is determined by signals from P2 (via the
SKN-1 is a predicted 61 kDa protein, largely hydrophobic, containing homologous regions to the bZIP (leucine zipper) class of transcription factors and the ant homeodomain in , 1992). Unlike the bZIP proteins, however, SKN-1 lacks a dimerisation segment and binds DNA as a monomer (Fig 3).
During cleavage of the zygote, SKN-1 protein is loaded unequally between the P1 and AB sister blastomeres, an effect mediated by MEX-1 and PAR-1. SKN-1 is required for differentiation of the EMS daughter of P1: in  In , 1993).
SKN-1 activates the transcription of at least two genes, The MED transcription factors appear to specify the fate of the EMS cell, since expression of the SKN-1 protein is present in the embryo from the 2-cell stage until the 12-cell stage, when it suddenly disappears. However, zygotic expression is required post-embryogenesis, for the development of intestinal cells (Maduro , 2001).
After the second cleavage, equal levels of SKN-1 are found in both daughters of the P1 blastomere, EMS and P2. However, only EMS produces pharyngeal cells and P2 is still able to develop into a healthy germline in The maternal protein , 1992). In embryos from , 1992).
The early Aba and Abp blastomeres are identical and exchangeable (Priess & Thomson, 1987); however, in the late 4-cell stage, these two cells are committed to different fates. This determination requires the Notch-like receptor,
Embryogenesis relies almost exclusively on maternal proteins and RNAs loaded into the oocyte during oogenesis. Patterning arises through a combination of oriented, intrinsically asymmetric cell divisions and cell-cell interactions. The PAR proteins and MEX-5/6 are responsible for initial polarisation of the zygote,