Having read the given detailed account, it can be seen that certain incidents occurring in the story could be deemed criminal offences, for which either Felicity or Amy, or both, could be potentially liable. In the following paragraphs I will endeavour to identify and explain these offences and conclude whether or not the two could indeed be made criminally liable for them, whilst considering the scope of the applicable criminal law and the principle of fair labelling. I have fragmented this essay accordingly, so as to deal with each identifiable offence in turn.
N.B. - based on the given information, for the sake of this essay it seems practical to treat both defendants as co-principals in the commission of the first two offences mentioned.
Felicity and Amy were successful on two occasions in implementing their plan to steal mobile phones from train passengers. Based on the given information, it appears that both parties would be liable for the offence of theft. Turning to the relevant statutory provisions contained in the Theft Act 1968, we can see how this is so. Ashworth's useful interpretation of section 1 of the Act breaks down the statutory requirements into five elements - three relating to conduct and two to the fault requirement: there must be (i) an These conduct and fault requirements should be looked at in turn in relation to the actions and intentions of the two defendants, so as to decipher their liability conclusively. Firstly, the mobile phones that Felicity and Amy targeted did not belong to them but were under the possession of others (it seems justifiable to assume this, as we are told the phones were removed from others' bags/coats - an indication of their ownership), and yet they secretly took them into their own possession, thus being A mobile phone clearly comes under the scope of the definition of 'property' detailed in s. 4(1) of the Act as including ' Elements (i), (ii) and (iii) are hence satisfied; the conduct is criminal. The defendants' intentions to permanently deprive can be assumed as it is highly unlikely that the appropriation was intended only to be temporary. The phones were also taken without the consent of those who owned them and it cannot be argued that any of the stipulations contained in s. 2, where appropriation would not be considered dishonest, could apply (i.e. the defendants obviously did not believe they either had a
Felicity and Amy therefore appear to be liable for this offence; the provisions of the 1968 Act can be applied without difficulty. However, complications arise when dealing with the attempted theft of the third victim's phone, as I will now discuss.
The Criminal Attempts Act 1981, s. 1(1) establishes that a defendant will be liable for this offence if they perform " Their actions clearly meet this requirement in that not only did the two The statute also requires Obviously, the girls showed such intention by secretly inspecting the Caroline's pockets in the hope of acquiring a phone. The fact that they had already stolen two phones in such a way would, if proven in court, greatly assist their prosecution also.
However, difficulty lies in the fact that there was actually no phone in the pockets to steal; it was impossible to commit the intended offence. In determining liability in such a situation the courts appear somewhat ambiguous. In However, contrasting this decision is the case of Clearly, the potential liability depends on the approach adopted by the court in each case. If an act-centred approach is taken, whereby the defendants are judged on the consequences they intended to happen, liability may be escaped. However, it appears the trend Felicity and Amy obviously thought that there was a phone in Caroline's jacket pocket and took action based on this assumption to secretly investigate the jacket in the hope of appropriating it. If this could be proven, liability for attempted theft may be imposed.
Another potential liability for Section 1(1) of the Criminal Law Act 1977 provides that a criminal conspiracy occurs when " Crucially, the agreement need not be physical but a mere 'meeting of the minds'. The agreed plan between Felicity and Amy to steal mobile phones undoubtedly amounts to such an offence, although would be very difficult to prove in court.
Criminalisation of these inchoate offences raises potent arguments in relation to principle of fair labelling. Whilst those attempting to commit an offence may indeed have a The scope of the law in this area can be criticised, as it purports to convict those who's acts are, somewhat loosely defined, as being 'more than merely preparatory', revealing a relatively broad approach to criminalisation in this area.
The Offences Against the Person Act 1861, s. 18 , states that " Felicity's action of stabbing Caroline in the eye clearly falls under this statutory provision hence it is likely that she would be found liable for such an offence. Felicity's aggressive conduct and frame of mind satisfy the elements of the statutory requirements in terms of Case law has aided the clarification of the terms 'Wounding' occurs when the skin is completely broken The Charging Standard refers to " It is clear that Felicity, through stabbing Caroline, directly committed the offence with assault (
In terms of the requisite Felicity's intention is clear in this example. It cannot be denied that her conscious act of plunging an object into another's eye amounts to direct intention to inflict G.B.H. This goes far beyond satisfaction of the currently authoritative test for intention established in Caroline's stabbing was neither a result of any accident nor a virtually certain consequence of some other intended offence, but was certainly the product of Felicity's 'violent temper', catalysed by her frustration with failing to acquire a third mobile phone.
Having said this, it is worth noting that there is a potential defence available to Felicity. Caroline's sudden and unexpected return may have caused Felicity to panic, perhaps due to fear and shock of being 'caught in the act' by Caroline, and cause her to think she was in danger of immediate harm. Her defence could therefore argue she justifiably reacted in self-defence to ensure this threat did not materialise. This line of argument is however likely to fail for several reasons. The law of self-defence turns on two requirements: that " We are not informed of any action taken by Caroline that could possibly necessitate the subsequent action of Felicity, and therefore she is unable to justify her reaction as being reasonable, nor necessary. However, the courts may be inclined to take a subjective view, taking into account how Felicity may have actually interpreted Caroline's return as posing an immediate threat to her. The leading case of A court adopting this approach would greatly benefit Felicity's defence, yet it would be very unlikely to assume such a sympathetic perspective in such a situation involving the doctrine of prior fault (i.e. the attempted theft which had induced the subsequent scene of confrontation between defendant and victim). Furthermore, the requirement that a reaction in self-defence must be proportionate to the nature of the threat would defeat Felicity's defence argument. The simple act of returning to one's seat before another expects it to happen could not be considered proportionate to being stabbed in the eye.
The final incident to consider is Felicity's punching of Delia, that ultimately lead to the latter's death. Felicity is potentially liable for murder or involuntary manslaughter.
Was Delia murdered by Felicity? Difficulty lies in the fact that death was not directly caused by the punch to the face but by Delia's subsequent fall, cracking her head against a handrail. Therefore the courts must look to the relationship between the two incidents in order determine causation of the death for the sake of assessing whether Felicity satisfied the requisite As usual, it must also be shown that the defendant had requisite For murder it is defined as " ". Felicity's actual intention is seemingly unclear - did she merely mean to assault and cause in injury to Delia as part of her aforementioned fit of rage, or did she actually intend to kill?
In terms of However, the causation element becomes crucial here. To impose liability, the chain of causation between unlawful act and the death of the victim must be unbroken. Application of the traditional " Causation The key issue here is whether Delia's collision with the handrail, which caused the injury from which she died, could be a " In such a case where the intervening event is the immediate cause of death, the courts will apply the test of reasonable forseeability, to be decided objectively as a matter of fact by the jury If it decided that Delia's fall and collision after being punched was a reasonably foreseeable consequence of that punch, the chain of causation would remain in tact and the actus reus requirement satisfied.
Turning to the fault requirement for murder, the Criminal Justice Act 1967 s. 8(1) establishes that the test for deciphering intention should be subjective and the cases of Whilst Felicity's purpose may not have been to kill Delia, she may still be liable for murder if the jury " No longer is the test mere "reasonable forseeability" as it is for the causation element, but for mens rea it must be "virtual certainty" of the consequences accruing as they did. It is unlikely, therefore, that Felicity would be liable for murder as there are too many uncertainties in the scenario - whilst it may be nearly certain that someone would fall over after a punch to the face, it cannot be virtually certain that the fall would be onto a handrail and that the resulting collision would cause fatal injuries to the victim.
With murder exhausted, Felicity's potential liability takes the more likely form of Unlawful and Dangerous Act Manslaughter The fault element here is not attached to proving the defendant intended to kill or cause G.B.H. but more to the commission of an unlawful and dangerous act that is so connected to the death of the victim that they should be guilty of homicide.
Case law again becomes most useful here in defining the law. The act As previously mentioned, Felicity's battery against Delia satisfies this requirement. Secondly, the act must be objectively dangerous. In Battery of such nature as Felicity committed is a clear example of a dangerous act therefore. Lastly, the act must cause the death of the victim, and as discussed for murder, this is left to the jury to decide as matters of fact and law based on the traditional "but for" test and the objective test of reasonable forseeability of the fatal consequences. Felicity is most likely to be liable for this offence, as the unbroken chain of causation links her act to Delia's death.
The courts approach in relation to involuntary manslaughter, whereby life imprisonment, the same punishment as for murder, may be ordered at the court's discretion, again raises issues of fair labelling. It is seemingly unjust for the courts to impose their most severe punishment on those who do not actually intend commit a crime meriting such a punishment, but who's intention lies merely in the commission of a common assault. Commentators have even called for its abolishment, and reform in this section of the law is under consideration.
The Accessories and Abettors Act 1861 details the threshold of participation required to impose liability on potential accomplices. A person will be liable if they are seen to ' The courts have interpreted this statutory provision and established certain rules and guidelines through case law over time. Does Amy's participation cross the threshold in relation to these last two offences committed by Felicity? Investigating her conduct and state of mind relating to (i) aiding and abetting and (ii) counselling and procuring On one hand, if we are to assume based on the given information that Amy does not offer any positive encouragement to Felicity, her mere presence at the scene of the crime does not satisfy the conduct requirement for accomplice liability. Case law indicates that the defendant must make some positive acts of encouragement The attack on Caroline was not planned but was more a sudden manifestation of Felicity's rage. The two party's common intention only went so far as to commit theft, and possibly assault through intimidation of victims with rulers. It was never agreed to commit battery or manslaughter prior to Felicity's actions. This suggests that Amy's state of mind would not satisfy the mens rea requirement for liability. She must have intended to do any acts of assistance/encouragement and have been aware of her ability to do so. It seems impossible that she could have been in this frame of mind in relation to an offence that occurred so suddenly and unexpectedly.
On the other hand, importance lies in Amy's awareness of Felicity's propensity to act violently, and in her knowledge that such behaviour has made her criminally liable in the past. Amy also realised Felicity was armed with an object being wielded as if it were a weapon. It could be argued that, with this knowledge, Amy's omission is one where she had the In this case it is the accomplice's awareness of what will happen in the future, and even 'reckless knowledge' i.e.
Clearly, the criminalisation of accessories to the extent where they are as culpable as the principal offender generates a profound debate, bringing the principle of fair labelling into consideration once again. The courts have not been able to douse criticisms over the doctrine's propensity to unjustly convict those, whose participation in the commission of another's offence may be relatively low, and it seems as though their current test for establishing the threshold for participation is undesirably too broad.