Lord Denning is regarded as having been one of the most radical members of the English judiciary, as shown by his enthusiasm to employ the judicial power of legislating in his decision-making, where he saw fit. Known as "the people's judge", Denning is considered one of the most popular adjudicators, with Lord Woolf praising his "...
When looking at certain Property Law cases that came before Denning, we can see how the liberal approach he adopted made his decision-making seem sympathetic to persons in residential occupation. Such tendencies led him to some radical and controversial decisions, criticised by his peers for their propensity to potentially 'clog' titles of residential property by creating an excessive number of interests which would lead to impracticalities and insecurities in conveyancing transactions. In the following paragraphs, I will endeavour to evaluate the impact such decisions had on the rights of those in residential occupation. In order to do this, we must first establish what the traditional legal positions were in relation to determining those rights, before investigating how Denning's decisions revised the positions, and concluding whether they had a lasting impact on them.
A fundamental issue that Denning dealt with in relation to contractual licences was whether or not such a right to occupation could become an interest in land and thus bind third parties. The established legal position was that a contractual licence was not an interest in land as it is revocable Authority for this rule can be found at case law. In  They demanded that Allen should discontinue displaying the posters. The House of Lords regarded the contract as creating nothing more than a personal obligation, bestowing rights capable of binding only on those party to it. It was not an interest in land that would have otherwise bound the new lessee to Allen's right to occupation. In Theatrical Properties Ltd. , the court held that the contractual agreement which gave Clore "exclusive use of all the refreshment rooms of a theatre" was merely a licence rather than a lease. Consequently, it was held that contractual licences were not capable of binding a third party, even with notice, thus furthering the rule established in
However, Lord Denning's reasoning in the case of  In this case, an agreement was made whereby a father promised to convey his house to his son and daughter-in-law, who lived in it, provided the couple paid all the mortgage instalments. When the father died, his widow inherited the house and sought possession against the couple, who had indeed paid the instalments in accordance with their agreement. In holding that the couple should maintain their right to occupation, Denning reached an unconventional decision. The This equity, Denning argued, had Denning's decision had thus created a new interest in land, seemingly going against both precedent and s.4(1) of the Law of Property Act 1925 which attempts to restrict such expansionary decision-making for the benefit of facilitating the conveyance of land. It therefore also seemed to contradict the fundamental principle that licences are thus classified "
Disapproval of Denning's decision seems abundant, yet despite such criticism, his argument that contractual licences could create interests in land persisted for some years, being upheld, although reluctantly, in the cases of Farmpride Hatcheries Ltd Notably, Denning's argument is well reiterated, and developed, in the case of Binions v. Evans Here, Mrs. Evans entered into an agreement with Tredegar Estates allowing her to continue to live rent free in a cottage, owned by the Estate, for the rest of her life, provided she simply maintained the house and garden to a good degree. Binions purchased the cottage from the Estate at a reduced price and, crucially, under express conditions that recognised Evans' right of occupation, and later attempted to seek possession against her. The action failed; the majority in the Court of Appeal decided that Evans was a tenant for life by virtue of her agreement with the Estate, which they felt had given her life interest in the property. Because Binions had evidently taken notice of this, he was bound to her interest. However, in adopting the rationale he developed in Errington This licence, he argued, should be protected by the imposition of a constructive trust as Binions had expressly agreed to allow Evans' right upon purchase; therefore it would have been inequitable to later deny her this.
However, as the reservations of Browne-Wilkinson His impact on contractual licensee's rights to occupation was finally negated by the Court of Appeal in Ashburn Anstalt v. Arnold This case necessitated a full review of the status of contractual licences. The Court of Appeal considered the doctrine established in Errington It further instructed that contractual licences would no longer give rise to proprietary interests, emphasising the importance of establishing clarity between proprietary rights and mere contractual obligations. The policy aim of maintaining certainty and security in the conveyance of land, by keeping a lid on property rights arising from informal arrangements, clearly came into play here, overriding these seemingly 'unauthorised' attempts at furthering the rights of those in residential occupation which Denning had made.
Traditionally, the courts considered that in a matrimonial home conveyed solely in the name of the husband, the wife's right to occupation was that of a mere licence, revocable at any time. In legal terms, this meant that if the husband 'deserted' his wife and sold the house to a third party seeking possession, she could be left without residence as her right to occupation was not binding. During the 1950's, however, a controversial line of authority Characteristically fighting on behalf of those in danger of unjustly losing their rights to occupation, Lord Denning furthered the doctrine of the 'deserted wife's equity' in the case of Hastings Car Mart Ltd. , extending the ideas he developed He held that a wife, who had been deserted by her bankrupt husband, could remain in possession of the house held in his name, despite her lack of He argued the wife had " Denning clearly found it unconscionable that the desertion of a husband could leave his wife and family homeless simply on the grounds that she had no legal estate or equitable interest in the land, referring to his decision as showing "
The decision of the House of Lords a mere year later in  It was held that there was no such right known to law and, therefore, that third parties could not be bound to it. The courts once again seemed adamant to restrict the abundance of binding rights to ensure security in conveyancing transactions. However, it appeared Denning had done enough to necessitate a legislative response from Parliament in order to reconcile this situation that was seen as leaving wives in an ' Under the terms of the Matrimonial Homes Act 1967, and later the Family Law Act 1996, a non-owning spouse was given the statutory right to occupation of the home (if not in possession), or to avoid eviction from it. If registered, these would be binding on a third party and a trustee in bankruptcy.
Lord Denning's legacy thus seemed maintained. However, upon closer inspection of the legislation, we can see how the rights it created for non-owning spouses are not as easily available to them as Denning had perhaps intended. The right operates as a Class F Land Charge which must be registered against the name of the legal owner Unless the non-owning spouse is under legal advisement, it is unlikely that they would know the necessity of taking such measures to establish their binding right of occupancy. In registered land, the right cannot be overriding and so a notice of rights must be entered so as to bind third parties. Furthermore, under s.33 of the 1996 Act, the court retains the ability to regulate the statutory right. Removal is thus at their discretion. In Kashmir Kaur v. Gill Although the case of Wroth v. Tyler
Although the imposition of legislation can largely be attributed to Denning, the reform it had on the law was evidently moderate. The issue seemed to have come full circle; from Denning's initial theory of bestowing rights, ad hoc, on non-owning spouses, to Parliament's retention of authority to restrict or terminate such rights. Denning's impact, therefore, seems to have been limited.
A key problem which the courts have had to address in numerous property cases is that of determining " The controversy of Lord Denning's unorthodox decisions reappears here, most noticeably in relation to his theory of the 'New Model Constructive Trust
The Married Woman's Property Act 1882 caters for situations involving the breakdown of marriages. Under section 17., spouses can apply to the courts for a settlement for deciphering ownership of disputed "family assets". In  This approach, typical of Denning, was firmly rejected by the House of Lords in  It was held that section 17 was procedural in nature, confirming that discretion should not be afforded to the judiciary when deciding upon the allocation of family assets. Denning's simplistic approach was held to be incapable of promoting certainty at law, and therefore failed to achieve any lasting impact on the rights of residential occupiers.
Notwithstanding this rejection of his discretionary approach, Denning made further challenges to authority in relation to acquiring trusts in land, leading to the development of his own doctrine. However, this fell under heavy criticism both in England and across the Commonwealth for being devoid of any concurrence with precedent Perhaps inevitably so, this was once again extinguished by subsequent decisions in the House of Lords.
The problematic types of trust with which Denning was concerned were resulting and constructive trusts In cases where parties had not given an express declaration of ownership In  It was discussed that only a financial contribution to the The courts attempted clarify which financial contributions they would consider to justify imposing a constructive trust. These were restricted to substantial direct financial or indirect financial contributions; the former relating to cash fronted for purchase or mortgage instalments for example, the latter to those which facilitate the acquisition of property to such an extent that without them, the purchase could not occur This clearly precludes non-financial contributions which are most often made by women, meaning all unpaid efforts made to maintain the house and its inhabitants are disregarded - a bias against women that Lord Denning would not tolerate.
In  He accepted here that Mrs. Hussey's payment of Thus, Denning reintroduced the broader discretionary approach to determining beneficial interests which he had hinted at in his earlier decisions in   In Hall v. Hall The court fashioned a discretionary trust, having shown its willingness to take into account "all the circumstances" including non-financial contributions of "keeping up the house
However, as indicated earlier, Denning's controversial conception of trusts was finally put to rest, as criticisms manifested themselves in some crushing decisions made in later cases, resulting in an return to orthodoxy that remained largely unchallenged thanks to Denning's retirement. In  In unanimously rejecting her claim to a beneficial interest in the house, it re-established the principles adhered to in   The House of Lords furthered the restoration of the traditional approach in  Judicial discretion in relation to determining trusts was also removed, in Spring v. Defoe
Although the courts were still willing to infer intentions as to creating beneficial rights, the strict tests for establishing the existence of such intentions were reintroduced, thus substantial direct financial contribution re-acquired its place as essentially being the only way from which such interests could be inferred. As expressed by Oakley, "  Denning was thus seemingly unable to have any lasting impact on occupier's rights in this area, in the way he had intended. However, calls for reform of the law of trusts are manifesting themselves, and so it remains to be seen if a balance can be struck, through legislation, between the traditional approach and that developed by Lord Denning. Indeed, the courts of Canada
It is clear from this investigation that Lord Denning's affinity for reaching decisions based on what, above all, he believes do justice However, Denning's decisions can be seen to have had some lasting impact, in the way that they revealed certain shortcomings of the established law, which Parliament and the House of Lords, in determining future cases, were inclined to take note of. They have thus incorporated some of Denning's controversial innovations into legislation and their decision-making, albeit to a more diluted extent of what Denning initially intended. These rationalisations of Denning's, often 'precedent-defying' decisions, are clearly apparent in cases dealing with matrimonial home rights and constructive trusts, and to some degree in those involving contractual licences that, largely thanks to Denning, can give rise to constructive trusts. In conclusion, the rights of persons in residential occupation have seemingly benefited from Lord Denning's decisions to some extent, although the potential reform in certain areas leaves us contemplating whether these interests will continue to be protected in the absence of Denning's influence.