The element of consideration is a requisite component of a contract as governed by the common law principles encompassed by the English Law of Contract. It is inherent to the element of exchange through bargaining in contracts, and is needed to validate contracts when found in conjunction with a legitimate offer, acceptance and an intention of the parties to create legal relations.
Consideration has always been somewhat of an unclear, problematic doctrine, often being left to the courts to decipher in individual cases - a point clearly illuminated by this investigation in question. Traditionally, consideration's definition is translated into a model of mutual benefit/detriment, as expressed by Lush, J in the case of
Looking at consideration in the context of the case of  The Court of Appeal came to a significant conclusion in this case that such performance could constitute consideration when it conveys a 'practical' benefit to the promisor. This somewhat revised the orthodox legal position on the matter.
Traditionally, the courts had maintained the rule that in situations where one contracting party, A, promises to pay an additional sum to fellow contracting party, B, provided B undertakes to perform their existing contractual obligations to A, B's return promise does not provide sufficient consideration, and that if one party promises to modify their obligations without fresh consideration being provided in return, the promise to vary the original agreement is gratuitous and hence unenforceable. The case of  It was held that a captain was not bound by his promise to pay additional sums to his crew, after the desertion of two sailors, if they would complete their voyage as contracted, due to the court concluding that the crew offered no fresh consideration for the captain's promise. Arguably, the captain enjoyed some 'practical benefit' in the form of his crew working harder, under greater pressure due to lack of crewmen, and that this could amount to consideration. However this idea was dismissed, the court concluding that the sailors " Lord Ellenborough placed the most importance on deciphering the legal obligations of the remaining crew, deciding that they had not done anything more than what they were already legally obliged to do under the contract, hence no consideration. The position of the courts was hence established, strengthening the importance of investigating benefits/detriments under contract as a matter of law, rather than as 'factual' or 'practical'.
The case of  The courts position thus seemed unambiguous. Mrs Beer had obtained a judgement for the sum of Later, at Foakes' request, a new agreement was made that prolonged the time allowed for debt-payment despite not mentioning any further requisite interest payments. Beer sought to recover this interest after Foakes refused to pay it. The House of Lords agreed that there was a one-sided benefit being obtained by the new agreement (Foakes had a longer time to pay at no added interest) and that this agreement should fail for lack of consideration from Foakes.
How so was it then, that in  We must look at the details of the case. The plaintiff had entered into a subcontract with the defendants, who held the main building contract which itself contained a time penalty clause, to carry out carpentry work in a block of flats for an agreed price of The plaintiff then ran into financial difficulty due to the agreed price being too low for him to operate profitably at. Consequently, a new agreement was made under which the plaintiff would be paid an additional The defendants were wary of incurring the penalty clause that was likely to take effect if they were to try and find a suitable replacement for the existing carpenters. After the substantial completion of 8 more flats, Williams had only received a further He subsequently left the site and sued for remaining payment. The Court of Appeal judges unanimously agreed to uphold the County Court decision that had awarded the plaintiff
Crucially, here the judges emphasised the importance of 'practical benefits' that accrued due to the re-negotiation of the contract - i.e. the assured avoidance of the penalty clause It also remained largely uncontested that the original agreed amount of pay owed to the sub-contractors was too low. Lord Glidewell defined a newly revised legal position, essentially stating that in situations when one of two contracting parties runs into difficulty and is potentially unable to fully perform their contractual obligations, a new agreement can be legally binding if, through a promise to pay additional sums to the party suffering difficulty, the other party obtains some practical benefit or obviates a disbenefit. Good consideration can be in the form of such promises in these situations, provided the new agreement is not induced by fraud or economic duress.
It is arguable that this rouses ambiguity in the scope of consideration as it appears to contest and hence distort the traditional stance of the courts. On first appearance it seems to be in direct contrast to the ruling in  Williams was only doing what he was already contracted to do, as were the sailors in Essentially, the court has become ambiguous in the sense that it, on the basis of  It is a shift from the traditional, pragmatic approach, placing the law in its more modern context - "a
However, the court itself saw the decision as not to overrule the principle established in  This seems fair as it is perhaps inevitable and useful that such a long-established precedent relating to such a vexed area of contract law should be placed into a modern arena to be tried and tested. The case of Williams v. Roffey was obviously very different to Stilk v. Myrick, thus it was distinguished by the court. The 'practical benefits' enjoyed by the defendants, post re-negotiation, made it unconscionable that such a contract should not be upheld for lack of consideration. Furthermore, it is worth noting that two cases from the 1950's, Ward v. Byham Williams In Ward, the performance of the pre-existing duty of a mother to care for her child was deemed sufficient consideration for the father's promise to pay her In Williams v. Williams, having deserted her husband, a wife's promise to 'maintain herself' (as already bound to do) during their separation was construed as being good consideration for his promise to pay
To conclude the discussion, a powerful argument exists suggesting the law has become more ambiguous in relation to the scope of consideration due to the ruling in Roffey. The courts now seem unpredictable. It is still unclear as to whether they will continue to affirm the traditional approach established in   However, it is also arguable that perhaps the law has not been made as much ambiguous as it has been re-defined to account for a more modern species of case, extending existing principles established in cases such as  Williams.