The regulation of mergers forms a fundamental component of competition law and policy, evidenced by the fact that more than 80 of the 100 or so national regimes presently in operation have adopted provisions to that end. The United Kingdom, in much the same vein as other nations with similarly well-developed, complex and expansive market economies - the US, Australia and prominent EU Member States in particular - has acknowledged the importance of having such regulation and has for many years employed a system of merger control. The FTA 1973 provided the UK's statutory regime for 3 decades until, in 2002, the Enterprise Act was passed. With the underlying belief that "vigorous competition between firms is the lifeblood of strong and effective markets"
, the Government brought forth substantial reforms to the domestic system, with the bold intention of establishing a "world class competition regime". To that end, amongst a host of other changes, the system of merger control was targeted for modernisation and accordingly, reforms to both its substantive and procedural aspects were made.
In the following paragraphs, I will endeavour to critically evaluate the UK's substantive and procedural approach to the regulation of mergers, as amended by these reforms. I will first consider the issues surrounding the crucial choice of which substantive test to use in merger control in order to evaluate the UK's decision to adopt a "substantial lessening of competition" (SLC) test, before directing my attention to the procedural aspects of the regime, focusing particularly on the reforms' effect on the system's transparency, efficiency and legitimacy.
The type of substantive test used in merger assessment is of paramount importance: "its set-up will not only determine the ratio of allowed to prohibited mergers but will also influence the number and quality of the mergers notified to the competition authority, as firms interested in merging will generate expectations concerning the probability that their merger will be deemed compatible with competition"
.
The previous approach employed in the UK was one whereby the "public interest" formed the crucial matter upon which decisions were based. While the FTA 1973 listed a variety of factors which might be taken into account in determining the public interest, it otherwise left the definition open-ended, and thereby left the competition authorities to determine what to take into account. This system, giving as it did enormous discretion to the authorities, fell under heavy criticism for the imprecision and uncertainty it created for UK merger control. By the time the Government came to draft reforming measures, it had become clear that this test needed changing for the sake of its rationality and predictability for businesses. The more difficult question was, however, what test should be introduced as its replacement.
There has been, and there continues to be considerable debate over what is most appropriate substantive test for competition authorities to employ when regulating mergers. The 2 major competing approaches are the abovementioned SLC test and another predominantly concerned with the strengthening of a dominant market position. Whilst an unequivocal victor has yet to emerge, given the worldwide proliferation of merger regimes, and thus from the experiences and lessons learned through their operation, certain accepted legal standards have developed which would seem on balance to favour the former of the two approaches. To evaluate the SLC approach taken by the UK, the arguments for and against the competing tests must be investigated.
A dominance test had been employed in various European states and notably under the pre-reformed ECMR, where mergers were declared incompatible with the Common Market if they created or strengthened a dominant market position - which the Commission's decisional practice indicated would require at least 40% market share - as a result of which effective competition would be significantly impeded. It might have seemed logical for the UK to follow suit, after all, one of the underlying principles of competition policy had been to make its approach consistent with the EC's. However, there are some fundamental shortcomings of the test which have been highlighted at case law, notably in Airtours/First Choice, and acknowledged by numerous academic commentators, particularly in the responses to the debate launched by the EC's Green Paper on Review of Council Regulation 4064/89, which provided considerable incentives to avoid its adoption.
The test's major limitation is its apparent impotence in certain situations of oligopoly. In particular, it relates to cases where the merging firms would be in a position to raise prices unilaterally without holding the largest market share and without resorting to co-ordination which attracts scrutiny under the "collective dominance" theory, which itself only operates in very limited circumstances given the CFI's restrictive conditions laid out in its Airtours decision. This so-called "enforcement gap" applies, to provide the classic example, where the market is comprised of three competitors holding 65%, 25% and 15% market shares respectively and a merger occurs between the latter two, leaving them with insufficient market share to permit a finding of a dominant position but, nevertheless, given the high degree of concentration in the market, competition concerns could readily arise. The SLC test, which does not rely on this inflexible jurisdictional threshold of market share, which must be reached before the effects on competition of the merger can be considered, bypasses these problems.
Furthermore, it has been noted that the necessity to focus on finding a dominant position, which is essentially a legal construct, "distracts attention away from the question of whether there is a problem created by the market structure and may encourage competition authorities to equate finding dominance with proving that there is a problem"
. By contrast, the SLC test has been noted for being more rooted in economics meaning competition issues can be more easily and coherently addressed. This, coupled with its greater comparative flexibility and sufficiently broad scope, lead to the near unanimous conclusion of commentators on the abovementioned Green Paper that the SLC test is more suitable to deal with competition concerns in merger situations.
Importantly, the SLC test also has widespread credibility as the test adopted in the US, Canadian and Australian competition regimes. It seems logical that the Government has been unwilling to depart significantly from the standards applied in those regimes; to do so would take the UK merger control regime outside the mainstream and would risk "undermining the standing of the UK authorities in the eyes of the business community and of their counterparts abroad"
. Furthermore, it would also appear beneficial, given the increasingly international dimension to mergers, for there to be a parity in substantive approach between those states with whose markets the UK's so frequently interacts, for both reasons of providing certainty to businesses and to avoid potential rifts in merger control, having been demonstrated so prominently by the US/EU clash over the GE/Honeywell merger.
There are potential risks, however, which may be associated with the introduction of the SLC test. The main concern relates to its open-textured nature giving it an extremely broad scope and thus the UK competition authorities a high level of discretion in decision-making. This, it has been argued, could "give [them] too much power and influence"
, whilst also creating uncertainty for businesses who may fear tougher scrutiny, thus leading to a potential chilling effect on merger activity.
However, wary of this, the EA 2002 also introduced new safeguards to ensure such problems can be avoided. Firstly, combating the potential for possible over-scrutiny of merger activity, is the availability, as detailed in both OFT and CC guidelines, of an efficiencies defence to mergers which may be deemed to cause a SLC, but nonetheless may be cleared based on its ability to harness efficiencies to deliver 'relevant consumer benefits'. The other safeguards are essentially procedural in nature, and so are discussed in the part of this evaluation to which I now turn.
The EA 2002 both maintained several procedural aspects of the previous regime and introduced some extremely welcome changes:
This essay has demonstrated that the UK's system of merger regulation has been greatly improved by the reforms made to the substantive and procedural aspects of the regime under the EA 2002. The SLC test, with its widespread international credibility, offers both sufficient stringency and flexibility to effectively deal with competition issues raised by merger transactions, based on sound economic principles employed by the specialist and now politically immune competition authorities, and measures are in place to alleviate concerns of potential over-application. Procedurally, while there may remain an element of doubt as to the need for two competition authorities, the UK now offers an accessible and much more transparent system which in turn provides welcome certainty for businesses and leaves scope for greater scrutiny of the competition authorities' decisions. The major defects of the previous system, having been so markedly criticised in the abovementioned Peer Review, have been appropriately addressed by Parliament, thereby enabling the UK to assert with confidence that its merger regime now operates in accordance with the best international practice.