Judicial review represents  "the means by which the United Kingdom's superior courts control the exercise of governmental power"
 administered through the multitude of decision-making authorities which operate under the auspices of the executive. Essentially, the concern for a reviewing court is whether the power exercised/decision reached by a public body has been done so both within the limits of the statutory or prerogative powers conferred on the body (thereby 'intra vires') and in satisfaction of the requirements of natural justice or what has become more commonly known as the 'duty to act fairly
. A decision-maker falling foul of these requirements is liable to have their decision quashed. Developing this, in the seminal GCHQ case, Lord Diplock usefully classified the ways in which a decision-maker may be considered to have acted 'ultra vires', and thereby established the principle grounds for judicial review under three heads: illegality, irrationality and procedural impropriety.
The scenarios depicted in this problem question require exploration of each of these grounds, including the recently developing doctrine of proportionality. It should be borne in mind, however, that this area of law is by no means clear-cut, having been developed pragmatically and somewhat unpredictably by the judiciary over many years, thereby leaving the system of judicial review shrouded by a degree of uncertainty. As we shall see, the stringency of judicial review and the availability of protective substantive/procedural guarantees for individuals affected by decision-maker's actions appear dependent on the circumstances of the case in question to some extent. Nevertheless, in the following paragraphs, I shall endeavour to identify, explain and discuss the key issues raised in each scenario, with the aim of reaching balanced and informed conclusions based on core principles of administrative law and relevant cases, so as to give reliable advice to the aggrieved pupils.
The availability of judicial review is dependant on the satisfaction of two key requirements. The applicant must have "a sufficient interest [locus standi] in the matter to which the application relates" and the matter challenged must be one falling under public law. These are not contentious issues in our given scenarios since each student is directly and personally affected by the decision of ABC College which itself, as a state-sponsored body, is susceptible to judicial review of its decisions in these circumstances.
The hearing-panel's refusal to consider X's medical report could well provide the basis for a successful challenge of the decision to expel him. Firstly, X can contend that the decision panel had neglected to take into account a matter of fundamental relevance to his hearing. It is well established that a failure of a decision-maker to take relevant considerations into account can render a decision void. As a rule, for a court to invalidate a decision, it is not enough that considerations have been ignored which could have been taken into account: it is only when the governing statute "expressly or impliedly identifies considerations required to be taken into account by the authority" that a decision will be invalid because relevant considerations were ignored. Broadening this requirement somewhat, it was also held that "the more general and the more obviously important the consideration, the readier the court must be to hold that... it [must] be taken into account"
. Exemplifying this, the decision of an inspector conducting an inquiry into a compulsory purchase order to refuse to hear evidence relating to the owner's conduct as landlord was quashed since the evidence was considered so "fundamental to the conduct and utility of the inquiry", that it was unlawful to ignore it.
In our present scenario, while we do not know the exact statutory framework in place for determining the panel's discretion, it is clear that the evidence provided by X was highly relevant to the outcome of the hearing, since the panel's ability to make a decision is wholly dependant on the establishment of a second positive test. Thus, one can strongly contest that the panel was under an obligation to consider professional evidence which highlighted the possibility of that test being redundant, and by ignoring it the panel acted unlawfully.
X might also argue that in ignoring the possibilities highlighted by the medical report, and therefore by basing its decision on rebuttable evidence, the panel made an error of material fact. The House of Lords has established a ground of review based on mistake of fact amounting to 'unfairness', which arises when certain factors were present when the body made its decision, namely '(i) an erroneous impression created by a mistake as to, or ignorance of a relevant fact; (ii) the fact being "established", in the sense that, had attention been drawn to the point, the correct position could have been shown by objective and uncontentious evidence and (iii) that the mistaken impression played a material part in the reasoning'
. The presence of these factors in X's case is evident, and so I submit that a strong challenge to the school panel's decision can be made on this ground.
The arguments against the policy of automatic expulsion, however, may be less likely to succeed. An aggrieved individual challenging the rationality of a policy faces the exigent task of convincing the court that it satisfies the Wednesbury test of unreasonableness - i.e. that employment of the policy leads to a decision which "is so outrageous in its defiance of logic or accepted moral standards that no sensible person...could have arrived at it". As commentators note, the test was "founded on an approach which was deferential to the decisions of public authorities" and thus established a "high hurdle to surmount". Accordingly, this route would be unlikely to yield success for X. It would seem well within the boundaries of reason to automatically expel a pupil for twice committing an offence noted for its gravity and "damaging impact on the community"
.
However, the doctrine of proportionality, having developed under ECJ and ECtHR jurisprudence, has infiltrated British law over recent years and influenced the way in which irrationality is determined. Whilst there is a degree of overlap between  Wednesbury and proportionality, the latter goes further by requiring the court to judge whether the action taken by a decision-maker was "really needed and whether it was within the range of courses of action that could be reasonably followed". In cases where fundamental rights are being impeded by a public body's decision, this amounts to the courts having to balance the importance of the objective pursued, and the means used to accomplish it, with the right of the party to which their decision is addressed.
In our case, the balance to be struck is a difficult one. A decision to exclude a child permanently from school has been noted as being perhaps "even more damaging than a conviction for a criminal offence"
 and one which X might contend impedes on his right to education. The school may argue, however, that the policy of automatic expulsion provides a necessary threat to deter drug use by students, so as to achieve their objective of 'maintaining discipline and good conduct to secure an orderly learning environment'
. I would submit that, balancing these arguments, considering the abovementioned scope for error in the initial hearing, and acknowledging the Court of Appeal's indication that the decision to exclude should be "a final step in the process...when a wide range of other strategies have been tried and have failed"
, the policy of automatic exclusion might be considered disproportionate.
Y's concerns in this scenario are in effect allegations of procedural impropriety against the school panel and this necessitates an exploration of the rules of natural justice in accordance with Lord Diplock's direction in the aforementioned GCHQ case.
In administrative law, "natural justice is a well-defined concept which comprises two fundamental rules of fair procedure: that a man may not be a judge in his own cause; and that a man's defence must always be fairly heard
". However, before investigating whether the rules have been broken, one must first consider to what extent they are in fact applicable to the decision in question. Exemplifying the court's pragmatism in this area, case law has demonstrated that this is essentially a question of the degree of formality in the decision-making process as to how stringently natural justice rules might be imported to regulate the decision-maker. The seminal decision in Ridge v. Baldwin established that in a situation where a public office or other benefit is being withdrawn for reasons of misconduct, the 'irreducible minimum' at the core of natural justice is "the right to a decision by an unbiased tribunal...and...the right to be heard in answer to those charges". Exclusion from school for drug-taking evidently fits this guideline and therefore Y's allegations of bias and of failure to hear her case would qualify for careful consideration by a reviewing court.
When dealing with allegations of bias, the question to consider is whether "the fair minded and informed observer... would conclude that there was a real possibility that the tribunal was biased"
. While, historically, the judiciary seemed more reluctant to find against a decision-maker on this ground, recent decisions indicate a greater willingness to do so. We should nevertheless bear in mind Lord Woolf's stipulation that "the evidence [regarding bias] must be compelling". While a direct pecuniary interest automatically disqualifies a decision-maker, compelling evidence and therefore real possibilities of bias have also been found in numerous other situations. For example, a coroner's decision not to resume inquests into the deaths caused by a sinking ship was quashed due to his description of the bereaved parent's as "unhinged" and "mentally unwell" . In another case, an adjudicator's statement that he would have been a "traitor to his position", as a member of a strict temperance sect, if he had voted to grant a license, meant the order of refusal was quashed by the court. Statements of this kind therefore seem sufficient as compelling evidence in demonstrating bias to such an extent as to render the decision void by a reviewing court.
However, in Y's case we know not of any statements made by the teachers from which bias might be imputed; Y's allegations relate to (i) a previous unfavourable course of dealing with one teacher and (ii) another's anti-drugs inclinations. The first, it can be argued, would be unlikely to cross the requisite threshold for a finding of bias since it has been held that even where the parties concerned had previously been engaged in litigation against one another, this was not sufficient to invalidate a decision. Nevertheless, in an analogous case, the Administrative Court found it objectionable that a teacher who had, in a previous affair, decided against the applicant pupil, was later allowed to sit on a hearing panel dealing with the pupil's exclusion.
Given this apparent room for inconsistency in case-law, it is useful to refer here to dictum of Lord Woolf for clarification, who, indicative of the court's pragmatism, states: "applications of the rules against bias must be tempered with realism; educational institutions...are apt to present special problems and it may be right to require evidence of actual bias, rather than mere danger of bias"
. This conceivably raises Lord Hope's threshold and, considering the apparent lack of "compelling evidence" of actual bias in the form of statements or otherwise, Y's argument thus seems destined to fail on this count.
Regarding the anti-drugs campaigner, Y's allegations of bias could similarly be held redundant. The courts have frequently indicated that an adjudicator who has demonstrated that he holds strong views on some relevant matter might not be disqualified from making a decision, provided a fair trial is given, under the premise that "preconceived opinions...do not constitute...bias, nor even the expression of such opinions, for it does not follow that the evidence will be disregarded"
. Illustrative cases include one where licensing justice was not disqualified even though he was a devout teetotaller; another where a member of a committee responsible for licensing sex shops was not disqualified despite previously publishing his opinion that none should be allowed. The decision that Lord Hoffman's attachments with Amnesty International precluded him from adjudicating over the extradition of a former head-of-state in Pinochet, can be distinguished on the basis of its extraordinary facts which demanded such stringent adherence to natural justice. While further information is needed as to establish whether the aforesaid fair trial requirement was met and all evidence was considered in Y's case, given these precedents, the pragmatism of the courts and Lord Woolf's requirements of compelling evidence of actual bias, the teacher's anti-drugs affiliation would appear an unlikely ground upon which to successfully challenge the panel's decision.
The final allegation in Y's case is a more clear-cut example of procedural impropriety and one likely to enable a successful challenge of the decision. The teacher's unconsciousness during the hearing meant his/her presence was effectively negated and therefore the panel, prima facie, could not hear Y's case adequately in accordance with her natural justice right. Exemplifying this, the Court of Appeal decided that a hearing by a tribunal which included a member who appeared to have fallen asleep did not give the appearance of the fair hearing to which the party was entitled, and so the decision was set aside.
A possible limitation on this right has, albeit on few occasions, found favour in the House of Lords. In Malloch v. Aberdeen Corp
 Lords Wilberforce and Simon argued that it need not be determined whether a fair hearing was required where it "could only be a useless formality" because there was no "case of substance" to be put forward. However, Y could strongly argue that she has a case of substance, given that her suspension from school comes at an extremely untimely period of the GCSE year, coupled with the fact that the length of suspension, a whole term, is arguably disproportionate to the offence of using cannabis - a low-class substance which should arguably result in the minimum penalty of a weeks suspension. It might also be argued that she had a legitimate expectation based on assurance given to her by the school that her case would be heard by three teachers. With one having been asleep, the panel therefore failed to give effect to this, causing unfairness in Y's hearing.
The allegations made here are essentially that irrelevant considerations and improper motives were taken into account by the hearing panel which wrongly influenced their decision to expel Z from school.
There is a well established doctrine in administrative law that "powers are not exercised lawfully if the decision-maker takes into account factors that in law are irrelevant"
.This has been articulated as a failure to observe the broad principle of reasonableness in Wednesbury
, and also as amounting to an unlawful abuse of power. Regardless of any such distinction between the grounds of review pursued, the courts have, in essence, "shown the great importance of strictly correct motives and purposes"
.
When considering whether an irrelevant consideration has been taken into account, a great deal depends on the extent of discretion afforded to the decision-maker. For example, where education authorities had the power to require the dismissal of teachers on 'educational grounds', they acted ultra vires in requiring dismissals in order to save expenditure, or because a staff member took an afternoon off in poignant circumstances. But where they had an unrestricted power of dismissal, they were held entitled to dismiss teachers simply because they were house-wives and deemed less satisfactory and less in need of employment than single women, so as to achieve their statutory purpose of 'maintaining efficient schools'.
Turning to our hypothetical scenario, it is difficult to ascertain the breadth of discretion afforded to the school panel in deciding upon the appropriate penalty for a positive drugs test. We know they were entitled to consider both what class of drug was found and also the 'circumstances' of each case. This could be interpreted as giving it wide discretion, and therefore the consideration of Z's poor grades may have been within the ambit of the school's decision-making process. However, this is arguably restricted by the next clause which limits the definition of circumstances, albeit not exclusively, to instances of dealing, indicating that the relevant concerns are those specific to the circumstances surrounding the drug. If this was the case, then both the consideration of his grades and the alleged financial motives of closing the specialist course could be considered irrelevant, thereby making the decision ultra vires and void in accordance with abovementioned case-law.
Attention must, however, be drawn to a crucial caveat to these rules. Case-law demonstrates that "there are some situations in which the presence of irrelevant motives will not necessarily be fatal"
 in circumstances where, provided the action taken was reasonable in itself, or where they did not in fact affect the decision. It was argued earlier that the reasonableness requirement would appear to be satisfied in these cases of expulsion for drug-use. Furthermore, considering the seriousness and illegality of consuming Class A drugs, the need to base the decision to exclude on anything else would appear entirely precluded, and thus Z's arguments would not, in my opinion, lead to a successful challenge through judicial review.
The availability of a right of appeal against the decision-making panel might deter the courts from interfering through judicial review. Case-law has produced a crop of judicial statements supporting the principle that an applicant "should first exhaust whatever other rights he has by way of appeal" before judicial review is granted, having been prompted by the rapid growth of applications for judicial review in recent years and the resulting desire to limit them. However, as Wade notes, "there is no categorical rule requiring the exhaustion of administrative remedies before judicial review can be granted"
. Lord Oliver indicated that to exclude judicial review on this ground was  "tantamount to saying that for practical purposes, the court's supervisory jurisdiction... does not exist"
, and that this was unacceptable since "a vital aspect of the rule of law is that illegal administrative action can be [reviewed] as soon as it is taken".
To comprehend how the courts come to balance this evident tension, I turn to the Kingsmead
 case in which Brown LJ stated: "the court's proper response will almost always be to leave the applicant to his remedy [of appeal]...save in a case where the governing body is plausibly said to have acted quite improperly". Applying this statement to our hypothetical scenarios, this essay has argued that in X's and Y's case, but perhaps not Z's, the panel acted improperly to a considerable extent so that judicial review might be appropriate regardless of their right to appeal. However, considering the fact that the defects in all cases could easily be 'cured' by appeal, provided that the board is entirely independent and would entertain the appeal on a de novo basis, I would submit that the court's would be reluctant to intervene before that route had been pursued.