In the essay "Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development", Mancur Olson proposes a theory of how economic growth is related to the development of democracy. Thus, Olson does not claim a causal relationship between democracy and economic growth, but that democracy and sustained growth - requiring the same set of institutions - will occur simultaneously. Olson's theory may provide an explanation for why the Chinese economy under Qing rule (1644-1912) experienced no intensive growth at all, whilst per capita income during the same period in Western Europe more than quadrupled. This essay will outline the key features of Olson's argument in the context of China and Western Europe at this time. By contrasting the gradual emergence of democracy in Europe after the fall of medieval feudalism with the "autocratic" bureaucracy prevailing in China throughout the Qing dynasty, it will be argued that Olson's theory is indeed applicable, yet not sufficient, for explaining the contrasting economic experiences of China and Western Europe since the late Middle Ages.
In the spirit of Hobbes He argues that, due to this, any human society of considerable size will be seized by a self-interested, rational autocrat - a "stationary bandit" - which "monopolizes theft ... through regular taxation" Thus, it will be in the autocrat's interest to provide public goods, such as military protection, if the returns from such investments, in the form of increased tax revenues following the increase in market income, more than cover the cost of providing the good itself. Under Qing rule, the Chinese empire was technically a bureaucracy, governed by an upper-class elite - the gentry - to which entrance was gained by passing an official examination. This is confirmed by Lippit's description of the gentry as "drawing its income from the surplus produced by the peasants, artisans, and workers above their own subsistence requirements" Lippit also points out the gigantic income gap between labourers and officials, where officials' earnings range between 3,000 and 18,000 times that of labourers. Olson predicts that a rational autocrat chooses the revenue-maximising rate
Figure 1 demonstrates how taxation distorts economic incentives: as tax rate increases from zero to revenue-maximising At Olson contrasts the expected behaviour of an autocratic ruler with that of a democratic one, and asserts that a rational democratic ruler will not push tax rates up to At Consequently, it is arguable that democratic rule boasts the intrinsic potential to facilitate economic growth. North and Thomas saw different kinds of nation-states arise in post-feudal Europe: France and Spain developed into autocratic monarchies, whilst "the Netherlands and England succeeded in placing checks upon their rulers in the form of representative assemblies" Hence, the fact that economic growth during the early Modern Period in Western Europe was particularly observable just in the Netherlands and England Olson underlines the Glorious Revolution (with the consequent establishment of constitutional monarchy
Olson claims that an economy may experience sustained growth only by the means of long-term investments, and introduces the concept of the "time horizon" in his discussion of autocratic and democratic regimes. Olson argues that this sense of security can only be realised through an independent judiciary and a court system powerful enough to uphold and enforce individual and property rights, and stresses the fact that these conditions are the same as required for sustained democracy. Jones declares a similar view and argues that a major obstacle for development of Asian (as compared to European) markets in general was that "the local governor was all too likely to sweep down at any time and exert According to Olson's theory, the rational self-interest of the autocrat will spur him to make promises to protect and not to confiscate the property of his subordinates, but that such promises - since they cannot be enforced by an independent judiciary - cannot be credible. However, as Lippit points out, it is hardly sensible to blame the stagnation of the Chinese economy on the oppressive bureaucracy alone, since other factors, such as Western and Japanese imperialism should be held culpable as well. In the Netherlands, the "private property of land ... was incorporated into the fundamental institutional arrangements" Thus, in accordance with Olson's theory, the establishment of a more democratic system of rule and an institutional framework potent enough to protect property rights in early Modern Europe seems to have stimulated economic growth.
This essay has discussed Olson's theory of the correlation between democratic rule and economic development in the context of China under Qing rule and Western Europe since the late Middle Ages. In accordance with Olson's theory, the fact that the Chinese empire was governed by a gentry acting like tax-revenue maximising autocrats - failing to ensure property and legal rights in the long term - seems to have been a major impediment to economic growth. Similarly, the concurrent development of democracy and an institutional framework ensuring legal and property rights in Western Europe also seems to validate Olson's theory. In conclusion, it could be argued that Olson's model provides a feasible explanation for economic growth in these instances, although it must be recognised that economic development in general cannot be considered the result of a single factor.