Many web-based resources provide useful information on developing countries' performance in meeting the Millennium Development Goals.
The United Nations Statistics Division maintains a website called "Progress towards the Millennium Development Goals, 1990-2005" (see Figure 4), providing both statistics and analysis on the advancement towards the final goals. The website is relatively up-to-date, well-designed and easy to navigate: the front page provides a quick summary about the progress towards each of the eight goals, and more detailed reports for each goal can be downloaded using the well-labelled menu at the left. The UN could be considered a relatively reliable and accurate provider of information, although it is arguable that the UN as an organisation has an interest in collecting and analysing data to suit its own purposes, for instance by signifying that programmes supported by the UN are doing particularly well in making progress towards the MDGs.
The World Bank Group publishes a site on the Millennium Development Goals as part of their "Global Data Monitoring Information System" (see Figure 5). Also this internet resource has a user-friendly interface, and provides plenty of information. The progress towards each millennium goal is summarised in a more graphical way than on the UN website, and major geographical regions are analysed separately on their progress towards the goals (which they are not on the UN website). An additional feature is that readers may access the section "Research and Country Studies" and download a range of reports published by the World Bank on topics related both to the MDGs is general and to each specific goal. Some papers are critical in nature, dealing with topics such as "Are the MDGs feasible?" which are unlikely to be found in places such as the official UN website. A major drawback of this resource, however, is that it does not seem to be frequently updated and hence, it fails to provide information on the latest developments.
A somewhat different view on economic progress can be obtained from the Oxfam "Policy & Analysis" website. As a major international non-governmental organisation, Oxfam produces a number of policy papers, some of which are within the area of economic development. As an independent NGO, it is arguable that Oxfam represents a different opinion than intergovernmental establishments like the UN and the World Bank, although this need not mean that Oxfam is more neutral (for instance, Oxfam certainly has an interest in making people more generous in their donations). The website contains a wide range of information, but the organisation is not ideal: for instance, it is not possible to browse the policy papers topically, but they must be identified using the "Search" function. The website is continuously updated with new policy papers whilst it is still possible to access older ones from an archive. Thus, this resource also provides useful information on the development over time.