Astonishingly, the academic interest in financial markets has a much shorter history than many other topics in economics. Only after the stock market crash in 1929, finance suddenly became an important issue for academic research and was no longer considered a subject "not (...) fit for academic inquiry"
In this essay I will first refer to the most important academic models, hypothesises and assumptions in order to illustrate the behaviour of asset prices made since the beginning of the 20 After that, I am going to question these academic concepts most agreed in the past by introducing a specific departure from them which is in general known as part of the academic field of behavioural finance. Finally, I will claim a particular failure of the Efficient Market Hypothesis (EMH) and as a consequence attempt to identify a suitable trading or portfolio strategy which will exploit market anomalies of a single stock arising from the malfunction of the EMH.
To put it all in a nutshell, one can see that the strategy of buying a call option after a month of positive returns of a stock and buying a put option after a month with negative returns yields 10,62 % on average on the invested money when the money from the sold option is invested in the money market and yields 2 % a year.
Fama (1997) concludes that "long-term returns are fragile (and) statistically marginal" Nevertheless, although the statistical measure of significance - the Sharpe ratio of the monthly trading scheme is only 0.12
I acknowledge that this strategy has to be tested further which due to constraints of the length of this essay will not be done here.
One pressing question for me remains: am I myself a noise trader when pursuing this approach? May it be the case that this plan itself can be considered as an action or a model of noise traders? De Long et. al. (1990) define noise traders as follows:
After searching for indicators from the technical analysis similar to those of my trading strategy I discovered that there are analogous technical indicators indeed: both the momentum and the relative strength index (RSI) are calculated similarly to my proportional returns over a week, 14 days and a month. Since I use corresponding measures in order to generate signals this strategy itself can be considered an action of noise traders. Well, but it pays.