The debate on the 'knowledge economy' has intensified in recent years as the ideas and concepts associated with the debate have become the subject of government policy making, management strategies and academic texts (Bradley 2000:114). There have been discussions on changes in the nature if capitalism, work, education and leisure without any seriously critical examination (Hull 2000). Thus, the endorsement of these concepts and ideas by certain governments, for instance, the UK's New Labour government, is a cause for concern. This essay will examine recent literature on the knowledge economy and discuss, firstly, varying definitions and interpretations of the knowledge economy and related ideas. Whilst focusing on recent literature, analysis will inevitably acknowledge more dated theories and concepts as there have been major similarities of discourse within the relevant literature over time. Secondly, a more detailed discussion on whether the '
It will be argued, in agreement with sceptics of knowledge economy (Webster 1995; Lyon 1994; Warhurst and Thompson 1998; Hull 2000; May 2000), that there is insufficient evidence of The 'utopian' societies envisioned by Drucker (1993), Leadbeater (1999), Hodgson (1999), Giddens (2000) and Burton-Jones (1999) are based on contestable assumptions and are, to say the least, idealistic. Their interest lies in 'the sweeping statement, popular slogan and digestible knowledge gobbit, regardless of how inconsistent with or embedded in existing bodies of knowledge' (Warhurst and Thompson 1998:20). Whilst a sceptical stance of the assumed shifts in the nature of capitalism and work is maintained throughout, it is accepted that major advances in technology have altered certain characteristics of society and work and the potential for experiencing the ideals of the knowledge economy exists. However, the barriers to achieving these ideals are fundamental and ever present and it is argued that this fact aptly reflects continuity in the nature of capitalism and work.
In recent literature advocating the rise of the 'knowledge economy', fundamental changes in the nature of capitalism are made explicit. The 'post-capitalist society' (Drucker 1993; Leadbeater 1999) is the most extreme of these proclamations and is rejected as a misinterpretation of the fundamental nature of capitalism. As Thurow (1997:326) suggests, 'capitalism cannot self-destruct' and notions of a post-capitalist society imply that the features of capitalism, 'the primacy of market criteria, commodity production, wage labour, private ownership and corporate organisation' (Webster 1995:161) have been radically altered. These features of capitalism are discussed separately below.
The knowledge economy literature tends to argue that, in developed countries, there is a growing trend towards work in knowledge sectors as manufacturing labour declines due to technological developments, the service sector grows and the demand for knowledge work increases (Giddens 2000; Leadbeater 1999:10,14,110). This is an outcome of technological advances in the production of goods and information technology where the 'sources of competitive advantage - innovation, design, branding, know-how - are at work in all industries from retailing and agriculture to banking and software' (Leadbeater 1999:10). It is acknowledged that technology and, more specifically, information technology and automated production processes play a more integral part in work practice (Webster 1995) and that technical and professional workers such as scientists, engineers, consultants and marketeers form a large occupational group (Warhurst and Thompson 1998). However, this should not be regarded as confirmation of an encompassing growth in knowledge work, 'wired workers' or positive changes in the nature of work. The arguments to support this assertion are discussed below.
In a knowledge economy it is suggested that there is a growing demand for highly skilled workers and that to succeed in the new economy, workers must be better educated, highly skilled, and adaptable (Leadbeater 1999). However, these assumptions are based on insubstantial trends and evidence and, in fact, evidence to the contrary is very persuasive. Regarding the demand for high-skilled labour, Rifkin (1995) argues that there are a shrinking numbers of jobs in manufacturing, services and agriculture and that the few jobs being created in the knowledge sector are too specialist to employ displaced labour with 'the hope of being retrained or schooled for a new job in the elite knowledge sector painfully out of reach' (1995:37). It is argued that in the knowledge economy 'growth has occurred not in knowledge work but in low-paid donkey work of serving, cleaning, waiting and helping in the private health and care services, as well as hospitality industries' (Warhurst and Thompson 1998:5). Thus, the demand for knowledge workers is presumably limited to existing specialist and professional sectors and whilst evidence suggests these sectors are expanding, it is too simplistic to assume that the jobs created have a substantive knowledge content as 'jobs commonly retain a low-skill character, especially in the fastest growing sectors' (Bradley 2000:129). Moreover, incidences of more highly educated workers 'does not necessarily indicate a higher level of knowledge in jobs' (Warhurst and Thompson 1998:4) as, for instance, evidence suggests that in 'banks, supermarkets and offices, the introduction of microelectronic technology is typically associated with the routinization and intensification of labour' (Hyman 1991:267). In addition, the contingent nature of skill definition and demand (Noon and Blyton 1997) and the tendency to 'relabel job titles' (Warhurst and Thompson 1997:4) makes analysis of skills supply and demand ambiguous. It is interesting to note that in Britain managers tend to 'redefine their skill needs away from craft to semi-killed labour' and a significant reason for this is managements' mistrust of labour (1998:8). Therefore, whilst acknowledging that it is not a general process, as Braverman argues, deskilling is evident in the 'information society' (Lyon 1994).
Flexible employment is important in the knowledge economy and this argument leads to a contradiction within the related literature (Hull 2000). In the new economy 'knowledge workers' or 'symbolic analysts' will be owners of their companies, through shareholdings, and will experience greater autonomy (Leadbeater 1999). However, at the same time 'flexibility will be taken for granted' (1999:80) and companies will employ contract employees 'embedded in flexible networks, rising to each new challenge with a different constellation of knowledge-based workers' (1999:146). The contradiction is clear and evidence indicates that these workers are not experiencing 'operational autonomy' as they are controlled through 'performance related pay and promotion systems in which targets attained determine salary levels and career trajectories' (Warhurst and Thompson 1998:13). Thurow (1997:16) has noted that, if companies' are seeking to gain competitive advantage from knowledge, they 'should be integrating their skilled workforce ever more tightly into their organisations' and this discredits the notion that flexibility of employment and the 'free agent nation' will lead to a successful knowledge economy. Moreover, flexible knowledge workers tend to be the victims of downsizing, subcontracting and contingent contracts and would 'happily return to secure employment' (Warhurst and Thompson 1998:20). It is argued that flexible employment within manufacturing, for instance, promotes dual labour markets and insecurity and 'the split between core and periphery workers is no longer a problem but an opportunity' (Curry 1993:10,11). Furthermore, if 'the degree of insecurity in employment depresses the level of skill' (Bradley 2000:120), the notion of up-skilling as a feature of flexible specialisation and the knowledge economy is called into question. Thus, flexibility of employment not only reflects increasing insecurity and precarity of employment in non-knowledge sectors but it is a concern for workers within knowledge sectors.
In the new economy the assumption of flatter organisation structures with increased co-ordination and teamworking (Leadbeater 1999) is based on the premise that workplaces are essentially non-conflcitual and harmonious (Pollert 1988). Yet, in conjunction with the preceding evidence, the organisational hierarchy continues to dominate, despite modern technology (Thurow 1997) and the workplace 'is still recognisable for the vast majority who too often remain poorly motivated, overworked and undervalued' (Warhurst and Thompson 1998:19). These accounts are notably pessimistic, but the espoused shifts in the nature of work should be located in their social, political and economic context. By way of illustration, the institutions able to redress the balance of power in the workplace, namely trade unions, have been weakened in many advanced economies and are finding the penetration of new companies increasingly difficult. It is argued that employment in new companies in the expanding knowledge sectors is regarded as being immune to and a move away from the exploitation witnessed in the traditional factory. Yet, if the call centre is to be regarded as part of the rise of the new economy, it is evident that workers experience little 'autonomy to try and fail' as Leadbeater (1999:83) suggests and the exploitation evidenced by the TUC report on call centres demonstrates that not all companies in the knowledge economy 'resemble clubs' (TUC 2001). In wider terms, Elger (1991) notes the most important trend evident in all sectors is that people are working harder. Thus, predictions that information technology and technological advancement would lead to an increase in leisure time appear increasingly out of touch, particularly in the UK where the long-hours culture is widely experienced (Arrowsmith 2001). Thus, evidence of changes in the nature of work advocated in the knowledge economy literature is ambiguous and it is argued that, despite suggestions that 'knowledge is the only source of long-run sustainable competitive advantage' (Thurow 1997:74) there have not been fundamental changes in the nature of work, at least for the majority of the workforce.
The rise of the 'knowledge economy' does not reflect It is argued here that the form of knowledge economy apparent in many developed nations signifies continuity, if not an intensification of contemporary capitalism (May 2000). Polarisation of skills, global inequality, increasing precarity and insecurity in the labour market reflect novel forms of organisation of employment within a relatively consistent system of capitalist accumulation. The rise of the knowledge economy has lead to shifts in the organisation of work, as high-technology automation and information technologies are more widely integrated into advanced economies. Evidence that manufacturing jobs are decreasing and the decline in manual labour is seen as confirmation that we are witnessing a shift in the nature of work. Yet, the shift from the factory to the office does not represent the eradication of exploitation and surplus value, or the existence of a post-capitalist society. The implications of these conclusions are firstly, that governments' implementation of policies to improve education and develop skills in a knowledge-based economy is premature considering that the changes in the nature of capitalism and work needed for these policies to be effective are not visible and evidence of the rise of the knowledge economy neglects widening global inequality and the deterioration of conditions of employment for the majority of the workforce. Furthermore, it is argued that the primacy of capitalist accumulation and shareholder value would need to be significantly moderated in order for the rise of the knowledge economy to reflect fundamental, positive changes in the nature of capitalism and work.
It is acknowledged that generalisations of the rise and existence of the knowledge economy in advanced economies limits the arguments presented. There are relatively distinct models of capitalism and some European countries experience less inequality as stronger institutions and less emphasis on the market foster a social market economy (Cerny 1997). Yet, it is argued that trends towards the knowledge economy discussed above are generalisable to a certain extent as countries are becoming increasingly exposed to international markets and this is destabilising social market economies and their institutions. A further limitation of the analysis is the ambiguity of terms and variety of theories that are associated with the knowledge economy. Subsequently the wide and complex set of literature on the concept of the knowledge economy and knowledge itself are not fully represented in the preceding discussion.