This essay sets out to look at the Heckscher-Ohlin model which is a model of international trade developed by Eli Heckscher and Bertil Ohlin in the 1920s. One important result of the model is the factor-price equalization theorem, which will be explained in the essay. However, this theorem makes no assumption about demand conditions. Therefore, this essay will continue to look at different demand conditions in countries and see whether the factor-price equalization theorem holds.
The Heckscher-Ohlin model is a 2x2x2 model where there are two countries (H and F), two factors (labour and capital) and two goods ( Both countries have identical production functions which are constant returns to scale. There are fixed total supplies of labour and capital which are fully employed. These factors flow between industries in a country but do not flow between countries. In all markets including factor markets, there is perfect competition. There is no distortion in all markets such as government interventions. While marginal rate of substitution is independent on scale of consumption, the model expands to allow for trade by assuming that people in both countries demand both goods and tastes preferences are same in both countries. Most importantly, the relative endowments of factors of production of both countries are different.
Relative endowments are defined in terms of the ratios between capital stocks and the labour forces in the two countries.
In equation 1.1, country H is relatively capital-abundant and labour-scarce because it has a higher capital-labour ratio while country F is relatively labour-abundant and capital-scarce. The Heckscher-Ohlin model assumes private ownership of capital. Owners of capital earn rents, Cost is minimized for production at Therefore, if both industries face the same relative factor payments
Similarly, ( As w increases relative to r, producers will be willing to use more labour for production and in equation 1.2, good Thus, country H which is capital-intensive produces more of good This is illustrated in the figure below.
In Figure 1, the equilibrium price ratio is steeper in country H than country F. This yields
The Heckscher-Ohlin model assumes that resource differences are the only source of trade. Countries have different factors of production and each good requires different factors to produce them. This is how they affect comparative advantage.
One of the main results of the Heckscher-Ohlin model is the Factor-Price Equalisation Theorem. Free trade will influence prices of goods and this in turn influences the returns of the factors of production.
The relationship between relative good prices, p, and relative factor prices, w, is illustrated below.
In Figure 2, the initial equilibrium is at point A where The equilibrium price ratio is However, when there is an increase in price of good The wage-rental ratio at point B corresponds to point C. However, at point C, the slope is steeper than the slope of the line that is tangential to both isoquants at point A. Thus, it follows that the wage-rental ratio at point C is higher than point A
An increase in price of good Economy would then move to produce more of good Excess supply of capital will bid the rent of capital downwards. The relationship between relative good prices and relative factor prices when there is no factor intensity reversal is a one-to-one mapping as in Figure 4.
The concept of unit-value isoquant can illustrate the theorem best. A unit-value isoquant is a locus of input combinations that yield $1 worth of output. This is illustrated in Figure 5.
Different production functions yield different unit-value isoquants. This is why the In Figure 6, an isocost line which is tangent to both unit-value isoquants is chosen. This isocost line has an intercept of The isocost line is also an indication of cost minimisation and shows that both goods are produced. If a unit-value isoquant is not tangent to the isocost lines, a pair of factor prices ( Therefore, for both goods to be produced, the isocost line must be tangent to both isoquants.
The region between It is a set of factor endowment combinations that are consistent with producing the same set of goods and having the same factor prices. If the endowment ratio just equals If the endowment ratio lies between Thus, if An important thing to note is that, the countries face the same elasticity of substitution for the two factors, capital and labour, and this model is assumed to have no factor-intensity reversal.
Therefore, both countries must produce both goods and under identical constant-returns-to-scale production technologies, free trade in commodities will equalise relative factor prices through the equalisation of relative commodity prices. This is the Factor-Price Equalisation theorem (FPE).
In the factor-price equalisation theorem, there is no assumption made about demand conditions. Following the previous assumptions made in this essay (identical production functions and constant-returns-to-scale, perfect competition and no factor-intensity reversal,) the model now takes into account different tastes. Assuming that countries have identical endowments and that the two utility functions of the two countries are homogeneous while differing:
In Figure 7, p Residents in country F have a biased taste towards good Stronger preference in good When there is free trade, residents in country F would import cheaper good Y from country H until the prices of good Y have been driven up to be equal in both countries and there is no incentive to import any more good Y. Price equalisation leads to factor price equalisation. Thus, when there is no factor-intensity reversal, factor-price equalisation theorem holds under any demand conditions.
However, if there is factor intensity reversal, trade patterns would depend crucially on the nature of demand conditions. The factor-intensity reversal is a situation where ( This is illustrated in Figure 8.
In Figure 8, ( If a country's capital-labour ratio is close to this factor-intensity ray, then the production frontier of this country is almost linear. In Figure 9, the production possibility frontier of country H is almost linear.
The production possibility curves for the two countries intersect more than once and this affects the trade pattern. If the highest community indifference curve for country F is tangent at point A This is the case that has been proved at the beginning of this essay. Then, trade would equalise factor prices. However, in this case now, this only happens if the diagram below
If tastes are biased towards good New tangent points ( Again, trade would equalise factor prices. However, again, this must be that the diagram to the left of
When there is factor-intensity reversal, demand conditions clearly affect the pattern of trade. If both countries have similar preferences (both countries bias towards the same good), then trade will occur with each country exporting a different good and factor-price equalisation theorem holds. However, if both countries have different tastes and the indifference curve of one country is above Therefore, factor-price equalisation theorem, which is a result of the model, does not hold.
Another result of factor-intensity reversal is that, both countries may be exporting relative capital-intensive goods or relative labour-intensive goods. Thus, rental for capital (or real wages) will go up in both countries. Trade causes factor prices to be more unequal than before trade.
The Heckscher-Ohlin model has interesting implications such as internal income distribution. Demand conditions such as different tastes between countries still hold the same relation between good prices and factor returns when there is no factor-intensity reversal. However, when there is factor-intensity reversal, demand conditions will determine whether the factor-price equalisation theorem can hold in such cases.