The Heckscher-Ohlin (H-O) model is a general equilibrium mathematical model of the macroeconomics of international trade, and was developed by Swedish economist Bertil Ohlin in his celebrated book from 1933 The H-O model emphasises resource differences as the only source of trade. It contrasts from the Ricardian model of comparative advantage in that it introduces a second factor of production, namely capital, and that it assumes identical production technologies in both countries. There are two goods, two countries and two factors of production; hence the model is sometimes called the 2x2x2 model. The countries have different factor endowments and one good is intensive in the use of one factor while the other good uses the other factor intensively. Consequently, a country would have a comparative advantage in producing the good which uses intensively the factor in which the country is well endowed. For example, clothes are relatively labour intensive in production, and if a country were relatively well endowed in labour (say, India), they would have a comparative advantage in producing clothes.
The assumptions in the H-O model can be summarised by:
It is the last assumption that identifies the H-O model, and the other rigorous assumptions are put forward to eliminate the possibility that the comparative advantages can be based on other differences between the countries. Thus, the model can appropriately scrutinise comparative advantages and trade by focusing on international differences in relative factor endowments. We have assumed that India is relative labour-abundant and Japan is relatively capital-abundant (or labour-scarce). Moreover, we have assumed that electronics is relatively capital intensive in production and that clothes are relatively labour intensive. With different factor endowments and identical demand, relative factor prices in autarky This would imply that Japan has relatively inexpensive capital (i.e. low interest rates) and India should have relatively cheap labour (i.e low wages). As the price of capital increases, the cost of producing electronics must increase proportionally more than the price of clothes. This implies that there is an inverse relationship between the relative price of electronics (the capital intensive good) and the wage-rental ratio (the relative factor price ratio). Additionally, the autarky price ratio The relationship between the autarky price ratios is:
Because of the homogeneity of production frontiers and community indifference curves (remember identical tastes between the countries), the relative autarky prices would be the same regardless of country sizes. Thus, as stressed earlier, what determine comparative advantage in the H-O model are merely relative endowments and factor intensities.
The fact that the two countries have different endowments also affects their production possibility frontiers (PPFs). The PPFs are concave because of the implicit assumption of marginal diminishing return of both labour and capital. However, the shapes of the PPFs are also determined by the relative factor endowments as we can see from Graph 1 above. As Japan is relatively capital abundant, their production possibilities are skewed towards the good that is capital intensive in production, namely electronics, and vice versa for India. The autarky equilibria are A
Before explaining the FPE theorem, it is worth explaining what happens if the countries open up to trade. The H-O theorem states that, given the assumptions of the model, a country will export the good that intensively uses its relatively abundant factor. Thus, in our case, Japan would export electronics and India would export clothes. This is shown in the diagram below (Graph 2). Initially we have that the autarky price ratio is higher in Japan than in India. Since clothes are relatively cheaper in India than in Japan, people in Japan will demand clothes from India and the producers of clothes in India will respond by increasing their supply of clothes. This causes the price ratio in India to fall, and vice versa in Japan. Therefore, the new equilibrium free trade price ratio must lie between the two autarky price ratios, where trade is balanced and where the marginal rate of transformation and the marginal rate of substitution in the two countries are equal to the free trade price ratio p*.
As we can see from Graph 3, an increase in the price of clothes will lead to an increase in the production of clothes, and a decrease in the output of electronics. Along a ray from the origin, all isoquants have constant slope, so that the slope at point B is equal to the slope at point C. Since the demand for clothes increase, and clothes being labour intensive, the demand for labour increases proportionately more than the demand for capital. Thus it follows that the wage-rental ratio in B (k Hence, an increase in the relative price of clothes will increase the relative return to the factor that is used intensively in the production of clothes (labour), i.e. increase wages. This exemplifies the unique relationship between relative factor prices and commodity prices, which may be written as:
Since, as implied by the H-O theorem, This is known as the Factor Price Equalisation (FPE) theorem, and it states that, under the given assumptions and in particular with no complete specialisation, free trade in commodities will equalise relative and absolute factor prices through the equalisation of relative commodity prices, and thus ensure world Pareto efficiency (illustrated in graph 4 below).
The FPE theorem is a rather potent result, which implies that workers and capital owners would have identical living standards in all countries. Consequently, there are no economic incentives for people or factors to migrate. Thus, we have that free trade in commodities act as a substitute for trade in factors.
Graph 5 below depicts the case of Factor Intensity Reversals (FIR), which will cause the FPE theorem to fail. Here C For The wage-rental ratio at which both industries have the same In a Edgeworth box the contract curve would be the diagonal if one of the countries' endowment point coincided with
extreme cases, Here Japan has an almost linear PPF while India has a more concave PPF, thus resulting in two intersections between the PPFs. We then have a situation where the nature of demand conditions is essential in determining trade patterns, since differences in relative factor endowments no longer will have an impact on the trade patterns. If preferences are skewed towards clothes Thus, the relatively labour-abundant country exports the capital intensive good, and the relatively capital-abundant country exports the labour intensive good, so that trade patterns are reversed.
On the other hand, if preferences are biased towards electronics (U For a given relative commodity price ratio faced by both countries, this will therefore generate the same relative factor price ratio for both countries. Thus, when FIR is present demand conditions are crucial. As we have shown, factor prices may or may not be equalised depending on demand conditions in the event of factor intensity reversals. Consequently, a complete proof of the FPE theorem should exclude the possibility of factor intensity reversals.