The analysis of recent banking crises is one of the most interesting fields in international financial macroeconomics due to their negative effects and recurrence, and the difficulties involved in their resolution. Diaz Alejandro (1985), when referring to the financial liberalisation processes started in the 1970s, anticipated many of these events with the catchy title "Good-bye financial repression, hello financial crash." Furthermore, during a new wave of financial liberalisation initiated in the 1990s, banking crises have shown more adverse effects when compared with the 1980s 1.
In this context of endemic banking crises a number of interesting questions have been raised among policymakers and academics: What are the causes of such crises? Which policies should be pursued when a crisis arises? How can another collapse be prevented once the crisis vanishes?
The Argentine 2001-2 financial turmoil revitalised these questions, exposing new issues due to the severity and extension of the distress, as the Argentine real GDP plummeted around 11% in 2002 while credit to the private sector suffered a 39.2% reduction in real terms (Dec-2002/Dec-2001). Now the GDP has recovered at an unexpectedly high rate of 8% in 2003 while the stock of credit to the private sector fell 18.3% (Dec-2003/Dec-2002) without clear signals of recovery in early 2004.
The objective of this paper is to deal with the aforementioned questions to shed light to the analysis of modern banking crisis, focusing on the Argentine experience. With this purpose I will first summarise a number of stylised facts on the causes and resolutions of recent banking crises. With the ground set for the analysis of the Argentine case, I will address in detail the characteristics of the Argentine banking system (henceforth BS) before and after the threshold generated by the devaluation in January 2002, including a brief comparison with the experiences of Mexico and Indonesia. The final step is to outline a number of policy recommendations to improve the situation of the Argentine BS.
There are two main conclusions in this paper. First, that in the Argentine case credit to the private sector has shown a negative trend even after a pronounced upward trend in the real GDP, yielding what I have called financial hysteresis. Second, that for Argentina and Mexico there is evidence that the GDP Granger causes credit to the private sector, albeit the relative importance of the latter does not return to the pre-crisis level.
The remainder of the paper is organised as follows. Section I addresses some stylized facts on the causes and resolution of recent banking crises. Section II introduces the Argentine experience. Section III compares the cases of Argentina, Indonesia and Mexico. Section IV briefly assesses policy recommendations for the Argentine case. Section V presents concluding remarks.
Up to now I have addressed the vulnerabilities and factors that triggered recent banking crises as well as the main characteristics of the Argentine bank distress. In the remainder of the paper I will stress a set of policy recommendations based on the previous sections' discussions and the analysis stated in Acosta Ormaechea and Todesca (2002) and Fanelli (2002) to address two main issues: (i) how to improve the current situation of the Argentine BS and (ii) how to avoid the vulnerabilities observed before the BS collapse.
The last two decades have been characterised by more integrated financial markets but also by the recurrence of deep banking crises, particularly among developing countries. In such a context the existence of macroeconomic, institutional and banking vulnerabilities has enhanced the likelihood of a banking collapse, an external factor often being the element that triggered the crisis.
Which policies must be implemented once the crisis arises? In this paper I addressed some insights as a rule of thumb to answering the question: (i) avoiding the liquidation of banks during the crisis since it may worsen public perception on the general health of the banking system, (ii) avoiding public intervention as much as possible and (iii) enhancing the regulatory and supervisory frameworks.
Albeit painful, the Argentine experience raised new issues about the likelihood and effects of banking collapses. On the one hand, an adequate regulatory framework being a necessary condition for a sound banking system seems not to be sufficient for avoiding a crisis. On the other, a proper banking system depends greatly on the soundness of the economy as a whole.
I also addressed an interesting insight to the problem of the Argentine banking crisis which, to my knowledge, has not been addressed in the literature on the topic. As a consequence of the BS collapse the private sector swapped its sources of funding from formal to informal, generating what I called financial hysteresis: once the economy recovers the GDP growth path, credit to the private sector still decreases. I argued that such a situation might be driven by a private sector lack of confidence towards the banking system. Interestingly, I also found evidence in Indonesia and Mexico of the reduction of the ratio of credit to the private sector / GDP even after many periods of sustained economic growth. However, considering the Granger causality test I found that the GDP Granger causes credit to the private sector in the cases of Argentina and Mexico, which may suggest further increments in this aggregate.
A set of policies which may help in both restoring the current situation of the Argentine banking system and avoiding a future crisis was discussed, summarised thus: (i) encouraging the stability of the macroeconomic and institutional frameworks (ii) promoting an adequate regulatory and supervisory system according to the new economic environment, (iii) enhancing banking system transparency, providing all relevant information to their customers, (iii) avoiding the dollarization of the banking system and (iv) reducing loans to the public sector as much as possible.
Valuable extensions of the paper are postponed for further research. It seems interesting to explore in detail the aforementioned hypothesis of financial hysteresis in the aftermath of a banking crisis. A first step in this direction should be to extend the international evidence as well as the samples considered for the analysis, attempting to shed light on the factors that would imply such behaviour. Another worthwhile extension would be to develop the analysis of the Granger causality test considering a larger data sample and including other international experiences.
1 See Huerta and Urriza Gonzlez (2000, pp. 7-8) for a discussion.
2 This phenomenon has been particularly important in explaining the appreciation of the real exchange rate in the case of Argentina during the 1990s. After the economic liberalisation process initiated in early 1990s the economy showed a boom in domestic consumption and investment which, under a peg regime and a supply of non-tradable goods inelastic in the short-run, yielded an appreciation of the real exchange rate (See Heymann (2000) and Frenkel and Damill (2003) for a discussion).
3 In fact, there is evidence that the existence of political turmoil affects public confidence in the BS and mayprecipitate a bank-run phenomenon. For instance, in the case of Argentina the resignation of the former PresidentDe La Rua in late December 2001 precipitated the collapse of the BS (see Gutierrez and Montes-Negret 2004, pp.7-8) while in the case of Indonesia the resignation of the former President Suharto in May 1998 also deepened thebanking distress (See Lindgrenal. 1999, p. 20).
4 See Villaral. (1997), Kaminsky and Reinhart (1999) and Huerta and Gonzalez (2000) for further discussion.
5 For instance, Diaz Alejandro (1985) attributed the fast liberalisation process of Chile in early-1980s without anappropriate regulatory framework for the financial system as the main causes of the Chilean banking crisis in1982
6 See Chang and Velasco (1998) for a model of banking crisis in open economies a la Diamond and Dybvig(1983).
7 As will be discussed in the next section, this element has had a fundamental role in explaining the Argentine2001-2 banking woe.
8 In particular, this mechanism more adversely affected developing countries as a consequence of the reduced sizeof their financial markets.
9 See Calvo (2003) for a discussion.
10 As will be discussed in the next section this measure was applied in Argentina during 2002.
11 See Cavallo and Cottani (1996) for a discussion.
12 Dollarization refers to the process of denominating credits and deposits in foreign currency. However, as thecurrency of denomination of such contracts was principally the US dollar this process is usually indicated asdollarization.
13 In fact, the dollarization of the BS was also thought of as an incentive to sustaining the exchange rate parity,since a devaluation of the currency would have implied the collapse of the BS (as was clear after the devaluation inJanuary 2002).
14 In fact, as the economic situation becomes more difficult and the general perception of the private sector biased towards the inevitability of the currency devaluation, international financial markets were virtually closed to the Argentine Government (see Frenkel and Damill 2003).
15 For a critical discussion on the asymmetric pesification see Gutierrez and Montes-Negret (2004).
16 This phenomenon is known as the balance-sheet effect (see Krugman 2001).
17 In fact, the political decision also contemplated compensation to banks for the asymmetry in the pesification ofloans and deposits.
18 The concept of hysteresis is introduced into economics from physics. It refers to a situation where a particular variable continues moving even though the original impulse does not hold anymore. For instance, often characterized as hysterisis is the inflation generated in an economy once a stabilisation plan is applied which consist of pegging the exchange rate while reducing monetary expansion to zero. Such a kind of inflation is often driven by the contracts fixed in previous periods which do not incorporate from a forward-looking viewpoint the new economic arrangement (for further discussion see Heymann (1987) referring to the application of the Austral Plan in Argentina in 1985).
19 As was explained previously the banking system has accumulated an important number of public bonds in default which are nowadays priced at  of their original face value, a fact that produced a markedly negative effect on the banking system's balance sheet. For this reason, an adequate renegotiation of the approximately US$ 100 billion in defaulted bonds seems to be a necessary condition for improving the financial position of the banks and thus the health of the BS.
20 In fact, during the Currency Board regime the role of the Central Bank was mainly as a regulator of the financialsystem, since in such a situation the evolution of the monetary aggregates is almost completely endogenous (SeeCavallo and Cottani 1996).
21 See Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) for a discussion.
22 See Fanelli (2002) and Gutierrez and Montes-Negret (2004) for a review on this issue.
23 Another suggestion much less 'extreme' by Krugman (1999a, p. 42) is to tax foreign-denominated debt as a consequence of the negative externalities upon the economy as a whole involved in the balance sheet effect.