A considerable effort has been made in economics in the last thirty years with the aim of answering important issues regarding monetary policy: why an economy ends up with positive inflation rates without any remarkable positive effect on output, and why it seems difficult to achieve a final outcome with zero inflation and, at least, the same output level.
To answer these questions the seminal papers by Kydland and Prescott (1977) and Barro and Gordon (1983a) (henceforth KP and BG, respectively) first developed an analytical framework based on the so-called time consistency problem (TCP). The policymaker faces a trade-off between unexpected inflation and output but, as the public incorporates that, the expected inflation is set at a sufficiently high level so that the government's best response is to validate this inflation and the output is not affected.
Many suggestions have been assessed about how to improve this suboptimal equilibrium. For instance, KP and BG highlight that by imposing strict rules on the policymaker the TCP might be eliminated. Rogoff (1985), on the other hand, points out that by delegating monetary policy to a conservative central banker the TCP is reduced. Furthermore, this framework gives analytical support to the explanation about why modern Central Banks (CB) tends to be more independent 1.
The paper has two main objectives: firstly, address critically the TCP in monetary policy; secondly, answer why by delegating monetary policy to an independent CB it is possible to reduce the TCP. Some evidence is also introduced to overview to what extent independent CBs have reduced the TCP from an empirical perspective with emphasis on the UK experience after 1997.
One of the main conclusions of the paper is that the TCP seems to arise only under institutional setups where the policymaker faces some degree of discretion. In this case, the policymaker faces a marginal benefit of generating inflation which exceeds the marginal cost when the inflation rate is announced below the equilibrium level, which may induce him to not validate such announcement. Furthermore, developing this particular insight to the problem I show that delegating monetary policy to an independent CB helps to reduce the TCP since, for a given marginal benefit, the marginal cost of generating inflation rises compared with the pure discretionary case.
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows. Section I critically addresses the TCP in monetary policy. Section II assesses how an independent CB helps to reduce the TCP. Section III analyses some empirical evidence emphasising the UK case after 1997. Section IV presents concluding remarks.
The TCP 2 in monetary policy arises when certain decisions (forming part of an optimal plan) at an initial date are no longer optimal at a later date, even though the information set between periods has not changed (Blanchard and Fisher 1989, p. 592). Kydland and Prescott (1977) (KP) first explained the TCP the monetary authority may suffer when conducting monetary policy.
In particular, KP points out this problem considering a situation where the policymaker optimises a social objective function in each period, in a world where agents do not have mechanical ad hoc expectations upon past prices (op cit., p. 478). A further refinement of this original idea was introduced by Barro and Gordon (1983a) (BG) in an attempt to include a theory of expectations formation (op cit., p. 592).
In the remainder of the section, a detailed and formal explanation of the TCP in monetary policy mainly based on the BG contribution will be critically addressed.
The assumption that, when delegating monetary policy to an independent CB, it is possible to reduce the TCP is mainly based on Rogoff (1985)'s seminal contribution. In this paper Rogoff explains how a conservative policymaker helps to reduce the average inflation bias present under discretion. Following this brief introduction, a question immediately arises about why an independent CB is directly associated with Rogoff's conservative policymaker.
In most of the literature on monetary policy (see, for example, Romer 2001, p. 489 or Walsh 2003, p. 393) it is often assumed with CBs being more independent that the people appointed as CB heads tend to be particularly averse to inflation. Moreover, behind this viewpoint remains an 'implicit' assumption that central bankers are on average less impatient (i.e., more conservative) than politicians and, when isolated from political influences, the former merely reflect this behaviour 15.
One may also ask if a trade-off exists between the degrees of independence and conservativeness. An interesting insight here is given by Eijffinger and Hoeberichts (1998, pp. 398-403) and Bergeral. (2001, pp. 4-6). In their analysis they sustain that different degrees between independence and conservativeness exist. Furthermore, considering this viewpoint, it is worth highlighting that Rogoff's framework might be associated with one whereby the CB is fully independent when conducting monetary policy 16.
Finally, it merits emphasising that in the Rogoff analysis it is assumed that the government is able to distinguish the relative inflation preferences among potential central bankers, which remain constant over time. This issue is especially criticised in Bergeral. (2001, p.7). I consider that this fact seems not to be excessively problematic from an empirical viewpoint, since different mechanisms such as a detailed analysis of the policymaker's professional experience probably reduce much of this information asymmetry.
The remainder of the section formally explains how a fully instrument-independent CB reduces the TCP present under the discretionary equilibrium following the Rogoff (1985) approach. As in the previous section, most of the notation is borrowed from Walsh (2003).
Shown in the previous section was that an independent CB tends to diminish the average inflation bias in the economy. Nevertheless, as Walsh (2003, p. 396) points out, a trade-off between a reduction in inflation and a rise in output variability around the natural rate seems to exist. To clarify, introducing (17) and (18) in (2) and taking variance yields,
(23) , which is increasing in 6.
This analysis could be extended in order to take into account the inflation rate variability. Taking variance in (18) gives,
(24) , which is decreasing in 6.
Equations (23) and (24) imply that as the conservativeness degree of the central banker increases (measured by S) the volatility of output growth rises, while the inflation rate volatility decreases. On the other hand, (24) and (17) together imply that economies with highly inflation-averse central bankers (i.e., more independent CBs) should show low average inflation as well as limited inflation variability.
Interestingly, most of the empirical work has found that CB independence is negatively correlated with inflation but does not show correlation with output variability (see, for example, Alesina and Summers 1993, Bergeral. 2001 and Walsh 2003). Furthermore, Walsh (2003, p. 421) has argued that this evidence suggests that giving more independence to the CB is a "free lunch" process 20.
The results included in this section are in line with this empirical evidence and might confirm Walsh's viewpoint, in the sense that more CB independence is not associated with more output volatility. Nevertheless, one should note that measures of CB independence, since it is an unobservable theoretical concept, are constructed through legal indicators which show how the government is legally restricted to punishing the CB in certain directions (Bergeral. 2001, p. 22). For this reason, it seems to me that the empirical analysis of the impact of CB independence on economic performance should be considered an interesting insight to the problem but not, in general, conclusive. Furthermore, other arrangements could be introduced as CBs tend to be more independent (e.g., an inflation target regime) which makes isolating the effects of CB independency and the evolution of certain economic variables difficult.
Table 1 summarises the results obtained by Alesina and Summers (1993) (hereinafter AS) for 16 developing countries in the period 1955-88 21. Increases in the index developed by AS signify greater CB independence.
Following Table 1, one can appreciate a strong negative correlation between CB independence and average inflation in line with the Rogoff (1985) model. The table also shows that the variance of inflation diminishes when CB independence increases. It is worth noting, as explained, that this correlation may not imply a causal relation since other factors that occur while the CB is becoming more independent may also affect the inflation rate 22.
Interestingly, as CBs become more independent there is no evidence of a negative effect on output or employment, either considering the mean or variance of the GDP growth rate and unemployment rate.
Since the sample date covers the period 1955-1988, it seems interesting to extend the analysis with more recent data, the study of the UK case until 2003 being the object of the next subsection.
This paper critically addressed the TCP that a policymaker may suffer when conducting monetary policy, defined as a situation where his optimal decision is not the same before and after the public set the expected inflation, even though the information set between periods remains equal.
I explained that behind the TCP remains the assumption that an institutional setup exists which allows the policymaker to behave with discretion. In other words, the policymaker is able to optimise his objective function in each period. Since he faces a trade-off between unexpected inflation and output and the public knows such incentive, the latter sets the expected inflation at a level at which the marginal benefit equals the marginal cost that the government faces for generating inflation. Thus, the economy ends up in a suboptimal equilibrium with positive average inflation without any effect on output beyond the natural rate.
How this suboptimal outcome could be improved was extensively addressed. First, the expected social loss under discretion was compared with that given by the 'optimal rule': a fully credible institutional framework which commits the government not to depart from the announced inflation rate while still allows it to manage monetary policy to reduce the effects of supply shocks. However, it was pointed out that such a framework could not be very useful in practice since it is difficult to anticipate the contingencies that an economy may suffer.
Nowadays, delegating monetary policy to an independent CB tends to be one of the most popular ways in which modern States try to overcome the TCP, analytically based on the Rogoff (1985) contribution. With a particular insight to the problem I argued that in this case the TCP is reduced since the policymaker faces a higher marginal cost of generating unexpected inflation when comparing with the pure discretionary situation. Furthermore, I explained that the TCP is not fully solved unless the inflation aversion of the central banker tends to infinite, an undesirable fact since it increases the stabilisation bias.
A brief insight to the empirical evidence was made, showing a negative correlation between the degree of CB independence and either the average or variance inflation, without negative effects on economic activity. An overview on the effects of the change in UK monetary arrangement after May 1997 is also in line with these results. However, I sustained that this evidence should be taken as indicative, since other factors not directly related to CB independence may affect the final outcome. Put another way, empirical evidence suggests that the TCP tends to be partially reduced with more independent CBs but the difficulties in measuring CB independence and the existence of other factors which affect the likelihood of inflation suggest that that this evidence is only indicative.
An interesting extension of the paper will be postponed for further research. It seems worthwhile asking if other institutional arrangements may help to reduce the TCP present under discretion without generating the stabilisation bias. A possible starting point to this insight, following the approach stated in Svensson (1997), seems to be explaining formally how an inflation targeting regime helps to overcome the TCP and to contrast the results with those obtained in this paper.
1 The TCP may also be reduced, for instance, when the reputation of the CB is considered, particular contracts are introduced in which the CB's compensation depends on inflation objectives or by limiting the CB's flexibility by institutional arrangements such as inflation rules (see Walsh 2003, p. 378 for a complete discussion).
2 The time consistency problem is also referred to in the literature as the dynamic inconsistency problem (see, for example, Blanchard and Fisher 1989, Cukierman 1992 and Romer 2001, among others).
3 In order to facilitate the analysis the desired level of inflation by the society is set to zero.
4 Barro and Gordon (1983a) utilise the parameters a and b to describe how costly deviations of output from the natural rate and inflation, respectively, are. Normalising the BG framework by b and setting  equals a/b yields the specification stated in equation (1).
5 A detailed analysis of the nature of these economic imperfections will be introduced later in this section.
6 For instance, in the seminal work by Lucas (1973) it is possible to conclude that high volatility in money supply shocks increases volatility in output, thus negatively affecting the overall economic activity.
7 It is interesting to note that, as Svensson (1997, p. 109) among others claimed, the golden rule in economics should be to eliminate the distortion directly attacking the causes of the problem. For this reason, the mere fact of utilising monetary policy to solve such distortions explains why, at most, a second-best outcome would be obtained (See Svensson op cit. for a further discussion).
8 Walsh (2003) also introduces the existence of velocity shocks which might affect the rate of inflation. Since the main results remain equal without introducing this shock I will continue the analysis with this slightly easier version.
9 For the sake of clarity and to avoid excessive notation I will assume that the CB sets  rather than 
m
10 It is worth highlighting that it is assumed the policymaker behaves with discretion as much as he can. Nevertheless, this assumption may not be necessarily true, as McCallum (1995, pp. 208-209) points out "(...) the inexistence of a technology for inescapably precommiting future behaviour does not imply that such behaviour is infeasible...what is needed is for the CB...to recognize that its objectives would be more fully achieved on average if it were to abstain from attempts to exploit these temporarily given expectations (...)." However, for simplicity, the abovementioned assumption will be followed throughout the analysis.
11 In fact, point C corresponds to the tangency of the short-run Phillips curve when 
e equals zero and the indifference curve closest to the bliss point B.
12 Unless an institutional arrangement commits the CB to validate this expectation. A brief description of this situation will be introduced at the end of this section.
13 Situations where 
a2&gt;1 might be associated with those cases where either the CB cares much about output stabilisation (given by ) or the CB perceives a high short-run benefit from unexpected inflation (given by a). Since considering such cases does not modify the main results, the analysis only considers the case where 
a2&lt;1.
14 It is also possible to consider marginal benefit curves with 
e greater than 
ak. However, since we already know that the final equilibrium will be at 
e = 
 = ak and the TCP arises when the CB announces inflation levels smaller than 
ak, only cases with 
e below 
ak are worth analysing.
15 Cukierman (1992, p. 351), for instance, argued that "(...) Conservatives usually take a longer view. Hence to theextent that there is a tendency to appoint relatively conservative individuals to high office in the central bank, thebank's rate of time is likely to be lower that of the political authorities (...)."
16 The literature on monetary policy usually considers two different forms of independency: instrumentindependence and goal independence. While instrument independence is described as the ability of CBs to usemonetary policy instruments without restrictions, goal independence refers to the capacity of CBs to define policyobjectives without government's influence (Alesina and Summers, 1993 p. 153). In the analysis pointed out byEijffinger and Hoeberichts (1998) and Bergeral. (2001), implicitly, full instrument independence is needed inorder to obtain an objective function with the preferences of the conservative policymaker defined in the Rogoff(1985)'s model.
17 Unless  is set equals to , a situation which will be extensively discussed later in the paper.
18 Intuitively, the explanation might be associated with the fact that central bankers are on average less impatient than politicians. So, a more independent CB may perceive higher inflation today with a worse economic performance tomorrow, reflected in the higher marginal cost that he faces for increasing the inflation rate today.
19 In fact, due to the stabilisation bias, Svensson (1997, p. 105) points out that a weight conservative CB may achieve at best a third-best equilibrium.
20. Or, put another way, the mean and variance of inflation is reduced without affecting output variability.
21 The data corresponding to average GNP growth and variance GNP growth covers the period 1955-87.
22 Alesina and Summers (1993, p. 159) also highlights the possible mutual causality between inflation rates and CB independence, arguing, for instance, that the hyperinflation in Germany may have raised German public aversion to inflation and its propensity to having an independent CB.
23 See Bean (1998, pp. 1795-1796) for a discussion.
24 The only exception is in the case of the real GNP growth rate. Since Alesina and Summers (1993) only covers the period until 1987 the sample was extended from 1988 to 2003.
25 The year 1997 was considered post-reform, even though only after May 1997 was the monetary arrangement formally introduced. Nevertheless, since economic agents probably anticipated this reform in their decisions it seems reasonable to think that the effect on economic activity started at the beginning of the year.
26. For the period 1988-03 the real GDP growth rate was utilized as a proxy of the GNP growth rate.