The concept of Credit Rationing (CR) has a long-lasting tradition in economic theory 1. The importance of the CR phenomenon arises because it assumes that prices may not adjust in credit markets in the way assumed by the conventional auctioneer mechanism. When an excess demand for a good prevails in any market, prices will increase until such level as demand equals supply. On the other hand, if an excess demand for credit exists but the interest rate charged on loans does not increase to achieve equilibrium, a CR situation may occur.
The negative effects of such a situation on the efficient allocation of resources can be interpreted from both a micro and a macro perspective. Projects with high social return could not be undertaken and agents may not be able to smooth intertemporal consumption properly when credit is rationed (Jaffee and Stiglitz 1990). On the other hand, fluctuations in the availability of credit could induce macroeconomic cycles as well as distortions in the monetary policy transmission affecting the real output of the economy (McCallum 1991).
The existence of CR has created an active debate as well as the construction of different theoretical frameworks to explain it. In the early 1950s, Paul Samuelson affirmed that "(...) non-price credit rationing was entirely inconsistent with profit-maximization bank behaviour (...)" (Baltensperger 1978, p.171). Starting with Hodgman (1960), a number of interpretations have been addressed to demonstrate that CR is consistent with competitive markets and rational behaviour. In particular, Hodgman (op cit., p.259) indicated that the primary issue in his work was to address the question of CR avoiding non-competitive market structures or exogenous limits on interest rates 2. By the same token, Jaffee and Modigliani (1969) asked if it is rational for a bank to limit the credit below the level demanded by borrowers when the interest rates and the amount of loanable funds are chosen according to profit maximization rules.
However, although these frameworks properly addressed credit markets' particular characteristics, they failed in constructing a consistent framework (Jaffee and Stiglitz 1990, p.853). Hodgman (1960) was unable to derive a non-monotonic loan supply function dependent on the interest rate, and CR was finally an ad hoc consideration. Jaffee and Modigliani (1969) "implicity" assumed the banks' capacity to differentiate among borrowers and a positive and monotonic relationship between banks' expected profits and the interest rate charged on loans 3. Furthermore, they finally associated CR with institutional restrictions (Jaffee and Modigliani op cit., p. 860).
After Akerlof's (1970) seminal paper, the imperfect information assumption was incorporated as a key element to explain CR. The first paper to incorporate this assumption was Jaffee and Russell (1976) with Moral Hazard considerations. Furthermore, Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) emphasized Adverse Selection problems. Nevertheless, there still remains an important debate about the empirical importance of CR as a consequence of Imperfect Information problems 4.
In this paper I will critically address the principal features of the Jaffee and Russell (1976) and Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) models to explain how the Imperfect Information assumption helps answer the question about CR. Following these frameworks, an empirical analysis will be provided to determine the CR's possible impact on the Argentine economy.
The principal conclusion of this paper is that the Imperfect Information assumption helps explain CR via the presence of a non-monotonic relationship between bank's expected profits and the loan interest rate. The empirical evidence on the Argentine case suggests that CR is a feature on those less-collateralized borrowers between 1996 and 2001.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section I introduces the definition of CR and Imperfect Information. In section II Jaffee and Russell (1976) and Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) are developed and discussed. Section III addresses a framework proposed by Berger and Udell (1992) to test the empirical evidence on Argentina, and Section IV concludes.
The first theoretical model which includes the Imperfect Information assumption to explain CR was Jaffee and Russell (1976). The presence of Moral Hazard behaviour by a group of borrowers who are indistinguishable ex ante by banks, in the form of an incentive to default on the loan, explains why banks may decide not to increase the interest rate above a certain level. In this situation it is possible to get an interest rate maximising bank's profits below the level at which the loanable funds market clears.
On the other hand, Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) emphasised the Adverse Selection problem. In such a case, banks know that a positive relationship exists between the interest rate they charge on loans and the risk of each project. As the risk of the borrower's pool has a negative effect on the banks' expected profits, and banks are not able to distinguish among the risks of an individual project, they may decide not to increase the interest rate above certain level. Again, it is possible to get an interest rate which maximizes banks' expected profits below the clear-market level.
In the following subsections I will address in depth both the Jaffee and Russell (op cit.) and the Stiglitz and Weiss (op cit.) models, finishing the section with a discussion on the criticism to the explanation of CR via the imperfect information assumption.
There is extensive literature on the empirical evidence on CR. On the one hand, Sofianosal. (1990) found evidence of CR in those loans not agreed under commitment in the US between 1973 and 1987, while Ghoshal. (2000) agreed with the CR hypothesis in less-developed countries. On the other hand, authors such as King (1986) or Riley (1987) found limited empirical support of CR phenomena. Furthermore, Berger and Udell (1992) concluded that there was no important evidence of CR as a consequence of Asymmetric Information problems in the US between 1977 and 1988.
As these authors employed different techniques to test CR 20, the results suggest that the way in which the empirical tests are constructed, as well as the country's degree of development, might affect the conclusions in one or the other direction. In particular, as a consequence of the characteristics involved in the CR concept, the empirical measure relies on important difficulties. As ex post the aggregate supply and demand for credit will be equal, the problem is how to measure the ex ante demand and supply for credit 21.
To test CR, some researchers focused on one of the Imperfect Information approach's corollaries (see Berger and Udell 1992). In a CR situation the interest rate charged on loans should reflect some degree of stickiness, which implies a low correlation between the loan and the market interest rate 22.
The main purpose of this section is to introduce a simple empirical CR measure based on the hypothesis of Imperfect Information problems to analyse the importance of CR in Argentina. In what follows, two tests based on Berger and Udell (1992) will be introduced.
In this paper I have critically addressed the two principal frameworks which incorporate the Imperfect Information assumption to explain CR. While Jaffee and Russell (1976), the first model to introduce this hypothesis, emphasised Moral Hazard problems, Stiglitz and Weiss (1981) developed a model which relies on Adverse Selection considerations.
Once these models were introduced, I answered the question as to how the imperfect information assumption explains CR in a way which synthesised both frameworks. As lenders are unable to distinguish from an ex ante basis between the risk and behaviour of an individual borrower, a non-monotonic relationship exists between expected lender profits and the interest rates charged on loans. In this situation, the interest rate which maximises the expected lender profits may differ from the market-clear rate. If there is an excess demand for loans at the former interest rate, a situation of CR may exist.
Nevertheless, the CR hypothesis as a consequence of imperfect information was criticised by different researchers, particularly from an empirical point of view. It has also been emphasised that the existence of contractual mechanisms such as collateralised loans may help to differentiate borrower characteristics in a way which avoids asymmetric information problems. I have argued that differences among borrowers are not unidimensional, and a limited set of contracts may not generate a symmetric information scenario, since some degree of uncertainty after collaterals is a probable outcome in credit market contracts. I also indicated that empirical CR measurements rely on important difficulties, since they involve ex ante data, implying that supporting the hypothesis of CR or not might be sensitive to the way in which the data and the empirical tests are constructed.
To conclude the analysis, two empirical tests on CR were introduced, adapting the Berger and Udell (1992) framework to the Argentine case. The evidence, although not conclusive, suggests the existence of CR among those less-collateralised borrowers in Argentina between 1996 and 2001.
Further analysis on the evidence of CR in Argentina incorporating different data for testing CR via econometric techniques, the empirical study of the effects of collateral on Asymmetric Information problems, and the analysis of sticky prices (e.g. interest rate) as a consequence of imperfect information are interesting extensions of this paper.
* I would like to thank ,  and  for helpful comments and suggestions.
1 See Baltensperger (1978) and Jaffee and Stiglitz (1990).
2 Such as ceilings on interest rates imposed by usury laws, Hodgman (op cit., p.258).
3 The importance of this assumption will be explained in section II.
4 For example, De Meza and Webb (1992) pointed out that CR is endemic to competitive markets where information issymmetrically distributed.
5 The plausibility of default by honest agents indeed exists in Jaffee and Russell (1976). This particular case occurs when incomeis associated with a stochastic variable, and the realized income is less than the capital plus interests agreed in the ex ante loancontract. This situation could occur to honest agents if they are "unlucky," since they did not ex ante expect to default on the loan(Jaffee and Russell 1976, p.657). Nevertheless, this consideration does not change the main results of the model.
6 Differences between honest and dishonest could also be associated with different levels of Z. While honest agents have a high Z, dishonest have a low level of Z (Jaffee and Stiglitz 1990, p.862).
7 In fact, as the term I is equal to (1+i), it is clear that L(1+i) represents the lender's cost of funding. It is also assumed thatlenders do not have any other costs.
8 As was explained previously, dishonest agents default only if the inequality condition Z<LR is satisfied. It is clear that as thevalue of the term LR increases for a given Z, there is a positive default effect on the agents which behave dishonestly.
9 When the absolute level of the interest rate and the amount of loanable funds is low enough, the necessary condition forachieving a default situation Z<LR is less attainable. Furthermore, it is possible to assume that there is no default at all for certainvalues of LR below an arbitrary minimum Zmin (Jaffee and Russell op cit., p.656).
10 In this situation the probability of repayment is high enough such as 
[LR]- R'[LR]LR >0.
11 In particular, Stiglitz and Weiss (op cit.) assumed that greater  corresponds to greater risk in the sense of mean preserving spreads. It means that two projects with different probabilities of success and different outcomes will have the same mean return. Formally, for two projects a (high risk) and b (low risk), the probability of success of project a will be lower while the payoff will be higher, compared with project b (i.e. Pa<Pb and Xa>Xb). Nevertheless, the mean expected value of both projects is assumed to be the same (i.e. PaXa=PbXb). For further discussion, see Jaffee and Stiglitz (1990, p.857). 12 See Jaffee and Stiglitz (1990, pp.866-8).
13 This condition is observable following Graph 4. As the firm's variance return increases (i.e. the project risk), an imaginary convex combination of points in the 
(R,r) curve (from default to non-default values) is moving from the southeast to the north-west region. This situation is observable through the short dash lines in Figure 4. In this scenario, it is also worth noting that the firm's expected benefit is also increasing.
14 This expression considers only the non-default region (i.e. R >(1+r)B-C), since in a default situation the net return does notdepend on r (i.e. it is always -C).
15 In fact, the objective is to clarify the relationship between the interest rate and the project risk in a situation where firms aremaximising the expected profits.
16 It is clear that  is associated with the interest rate received by depositors. In a competitive market of loanable funds,  could beassumed as "given" from the bank's viewpoint.
17 Or, as Stiglitz and Weiss argued (op cit., p.393) "(...) When the price (interest rate) affects the nature of the transaction, it maynot also clear the market (...)".
18 See Jaffee and Stiglitz (1990, pp.866-8) and Freixas and Rochet (1997, pp.144-5).
19 In particular, Jaffee and Stiglitz (op cit.) stated that "(...) as the dimensionality of the space of borrower characteristics is largerthan the dimensionality of the space of contracts, it seems unlikely that perfect information can be obtained (...)" (op cit. p.866).
20 For a review, see Berger and Udell (1992).
21 Or, putting it another way, "(...) We generally observe the quantity of credit that is transacted ... not the amount that isdemanded or supplied (...)" (Jaffee and Stigltiz 1990, p.874).
22 If the credit market is under CR conditions, lenders may refuse to increase the interest rate charged on loans in order to avoidMoral Hazard or Adverse Selection problems.
23 Berger and Udell (1992) differentiated two borrower groups: commitment and non-commitment borrowers, in order to pursuethe tests.
24 Catao's (1997) classification segmented the credit into mortgage and non-mortgage loans. However, other credits such aspledge loans have important collateral and may also be less exposed to information problems. In order to address this issue Idecided to work with broader categories.
25 High collateralised loans include: mortgage, pledge and the category "others."
26 Low collateralised loans include: current accounts overdrafts, other overdrafts, personal loans and bills.
27 For an overview of the economic policies implemented in Argentina since 2001 see Frenkelal. (2003).
28 In fact, LCL should show a greater degree of stickiness because this group could be more affected by asymmetric informationproblems.
29 The hypothesis here is simple, but controversial. It means that, as this group is more subject to information problems lendersask them for collateral. However, the opposite could also be true. As they give collateral they are less likely to suffer AsymmetricInformation problems. Whether the first or the second argument is correct is a topic for further research.
30 In particular, in late 2001 most banking deposits were frozen by law (i.e. "the corralito") (see Frenkelal. 2003).
31 Almost all public and private banks attempted to protect themselves from the exchange rate risk by concentrating their assets in US$-denominated loans (see Frenkelal. 2003).