The phenomenon of Currency Substitution (CS) has a long tradition in economic literature 1. The term refers to a situation where a foreign currency is utilized as a medium of exchange by agents in a particular economy (Calvo and Vgh 1996, p.153). This phenomenon is particularly important when the domestic currency is not fully credible, probably associated with a lack of confidence in the monetary policies applied in the country.
If CS holds, agents will swap the domestic for foreign currency as the domestic exchange rate tends to depreciate. This approach has been utilized in the empirical literature on CS, where a demand for money function is augmented with the introduction of the exchange rate (Arango and Nadiri, 1981).
The econometric testing of CS with a vector error correction (VEC) model has been applied in different developing countries with diverse results. For instance, Pozo and Wheeler (2000) did not find evidence of CS in Singapore against the US dollar. On the other hand, Bahmani-Oskooee and Techaratanachai (2001) and Prockal. (2003) found evidence of CS in Thailand and Latin-America,2 respectively, also against the US dollar.
The objective of this paper is to test the CS phenomenon in Argentina with a VEC model utilizing a simple open-economy money demand function. As usual in the literature on VEC models, the technique developed in Johansen (1988) and Johansen and Juselius (1990) to determine the cointegration relations is applied.
As non-normalities in the residuals of the first vector autoregressive (VAR) formulation were found, the nonparametric test proposed by Bierens (1997) is also introduced. Both approaches confirmed the existence of one long-run relation in the demand for money.
Finally, the results obtained through the estimation of the cointegration vector suggest the absence of the CS phenomenon in Argentina from 1991:04 to 2003:12.
The paper is organized as follows. Section I introduces the data. Section II discusses the demand for money equation. Section III explains the VEC formulation and the cointegration analysis. Section IV briefly describes an extension to analyse the model's short-run dynamics. Section V concludes.
After the implementation of the Convertibility Plan in April 1991 3, real cash balances holdings in Argentina increased markedly. The economic authorities' commitment to following strict monetary policy rules during the 1990s enhanced confidence in the domestic currency, showing a break with the unstable pattern of the 1980s 4. Figure 1 shows the positive evolution of real cash balances during the 1990s.
The relative stability of the velocity of money during the period also reflects the improvements on the monetary side of the economy. I constructed a pseudo-velocity variable, replacing the corresponding level of prices with the nominal effective exchange rate (See figure 2). The empirical evidence on the validity of the PPP in the long run supports this assumption 5. Furthermore, the evolution of the pseudo-velocity was plotted with the interest rate in order to appreciate the long-run behaviour of these variables.
Figure 2 shows a similar trend in the pseudo-velocity of money and in the interest rate, suggesting the existence of a long-run relationship between them. In Figure 3 the evolution of the Industrial Production Index was plotted, showing important variability during the 1990s.
The variables included in the model are the real demand for money M, the real income Y, a short-run interest rate R and the nominal effective exchange rate E. The monetary aggregate is real M1 6. As a proxy of the real income the monthly industrial production index was utilized (IP). Both, M1 and IP are seasonally adjusted. R is the interest rate on time deposits up to 60 days and represents the opportunity cost agents face when holding cash. The exchange rate is the effective market exchange rate measured as units of Argentine pesos per unit of US dollars. All the variables are in logarithms, the sample period is 1991:04 to 2003:12 and the data were obtained from the Central Bank and the Ministry of Economy of Argentina.
Table 1 summarizes the descriptive statistics of the data. Non-normality in the variables is remarkable. Also important is the high volatility present in R and Y, a fact that may affect the results of the econometric analysis. The number of observations is considerable, which supports testing for long-run relations 7.
Following Prockal. (2003) a log-linear model of demand for domestic currency in open economies will be tested. The money demand function takes the following form:
(1)
where the only variable not defined previously is , representing the error term. As usual, the sign of b (i.e., income elasticity) is expected to be positive and the interest rate elasticity reflected in c is expected to be negative. Finally, the sign of d (i.e., exchange rate elasticity) will depend on the existence of the CS phenomenon.
If CS holds, as the exchange rate increases (i.e., depreciation of domestic currency), agents will substitute domestic for foreign currency (Prockal. 2003, p.421). In this situation d is expected to be negative. On the other hand, a positive value of d means that CS does not hold 8.
The cointegration analysis followed in this paper corresponds to the Johansen (1988) and Johansen and Juselius (1990) approach (hereafter Johansen technique). Among other benefits, the Johansen maximum likelihood (ML) technique is easily applicable in multivariate frameworks, but is based on the assumption of Gaussian errors in the VEC specification. For this reason, as a last step in the analysis the non-parametric Bierens (1997) test for cointegration will be addressed.
Following the empirical work on the monetary transmission mechanisms 24, the study of the short-run dynamics of the system will be addressed with the VAR formulation stated in equation (2).
After considered this VAR formulation with the endogenous variables defined in (1) and 6 lags, a number of empirical anomalies were found in the IRFs. Most of these non-well behaved results are associated with the broadly-denominated economic puzzles25,26. These puzzles have been solved in the empirical work introducing exogenous variables which control for autonomous monetary policy movements (Favero 2001, pp.176-180).
Peersman and Smets (2001) proposed focusing on certain exogenous variables to solve these problems, the discussion of this framework being the objective of the next subsections.
The CS phenomenon may have important implications in terms of monetary policy since it implies a swap from domestic to foreign currency as the exchange rate tends to depreciate. A number of empirical studies of CS in developing countries have been carried out through VEC models, obtaining results which support or not the CS hypothesis.
To analyse the CS phenomenon in Argentina between 1991:04 and 2003:12, I followed the VEC approach addressed in Prock et al (2003). In order to test for cointegration the well-known Johansen technique was followed, but several issues arose when this method was implemented.
In particular, as a possible consequence of the Argentine data's high fluctuations, the residuals of the first VAR formulation showed strong evidence of non-normalities. Since these non-normalities affect the inference in the Johansen technique, I incorporated 10 dummies in the VAR specification to obtain normal multivariate residuals. Nevertheless, inspection of the residuals of each variable indicated the possibility of further improvements in the specification.
Concerned about this problem, the non-parametric test of cointegration proposed by Bierens (1997) was introduced. Furthermore, since the results of both approaches indicated the existence of one cointegration relation and the multivariate residuals behaved approximately normally, I continue with the Johansen technique to estimate the cointegration vector.
Curiously, the normalised cointegration vector obtained with the Johansen technique does not show evidence of CS in Argentina for the period 1991:04 to 2003:12. Several improvements in the monetary policies implemented during the 1990s may explain the differences with the results obtained by Prock et al (2003) with data from mid-1980s.
Interesting extensions of this paper are postponed for further research. Firstly, the estimation of the cointegrating vector with the nonparametric approach of Bierens (1997) and the comparison of the results with those obtained by the Johansen technique. Furthermore, as a consequence of the high instability of the Argentine data, nonparametric methods for analysis cointegration seem to be an interesting avenue for future research. Secondly, it seems interesting to analyse the CS phenomenon in Argentina during the 1980s. Such an analysis may provide an important reference to compare the effects of the economic policies implemented during the 1990s on the long-run demand for money. Finally, it might be interesting to continue the analysis of the short-run dynamics of the model considering different VAR identification approaches.
1 See Calvo and Vgh (1996) for a discussion.
2 Prockal. (2003) considered the cases of Argentina, Brazil and Mexico.
3 See Cavallo and Cottani (1997) for a review.
4 From the analysis by Ahumada (1992) for the period 1977 and 1988 it is possible to appreciate that "(...) Real holdings ofmoney declined during the early 1980s, increased sharply after June 1985, ...followed by a new demonetization period withpartial recoveries in 1987 and 1988 (...)" (op cit., p.337).
5 For a discussion on the empirical evidence of the PPP in the Long-Run see Sarno and Taylor (2002).
6 To obtain the real demand for money the nominal quantity of M1 was deflated by the consumer price index (CPI).
7 The EViews econometric software (version 4.1) will be utilized to perform the cointegration analysis.
8 The economic interpretation of a positive value of d will be discussed in subsection F.
9 While the ADF test corrects for higher serial correlation adding lagged terms, the PP test makes a nonparametric correctionwhich is more robust under a serial correlation and time-dependent heteroskedasticity of unknown form (Chenal. 2002,p.1122).
10 To determine the number of lags included in the tests, the Akaike (AIC) and Schwarz (SC) information criteria were utilized.In case of divergence, the SC criterion was considered since it tends to select a more parsimonious model (Enders 2004, p.193).
11 In fact, the tests' power for unit roots might be reduced if deterministic components not present in the DGP are included in thetest (Harris op cit., p.31).
12 The only exception is in the ADF test including the intercept for R in levels, where the null hypothesis is rejected at asignificance level of 5%. Nevertheless, when R is tested under other specifications or in all cases with the PP test, the nullhypothesis is not rejected in levels.
13 The information criteria utilised in the paper are: Akaike (AIC), Schwarz (SC), Final Prediction Error (FPE) and Hannan and Quinn (HQ).
14 In fact, in the case of the 3 lags suggested by the most parsimonious SC criterion there still was evidence of serial correlation.On the other hand, considering 6 lags in the VAR model the LM test for autocorrelation did not show evidence of serialcorrelation.
15 I included a total of 10 dummies which adopt a value equal to 1 in a particular observation and otherwise.
16 The possibility of a misspecification will be introduced later in the paper and a nonparametric test for cointegration will be addressed. In particular, it is worth noting the noise in the exchange rate residuals after the exchange rate correction in January 2002, not solved with the introduction of the dummies. Furthermore, the analysis of the model considering the possibility of a structural break after January 2002 needs further research.
17 This method consists of estimating all the specified forms from the most restrictive Model 2 to the least restrictive Model 5,under different cointegration relations. The selected model is determined the first time that the null hypothesis is not rejectedutilising both, the 
trace and the 
max tests.
18 The inclusion of the dummies modifies the deterministic nucleus of the model and the appropriate critical values for the testsshould be re-computed (Favero 2001, p.74). Nevertheless, I decided to follow Favero (op cit., p.76), and ignore the modificationof the relevant distributions generated by the inclusion of dummies.
19 This test was constructed with the EasyReg software obtainable from Bierens's official web page:
20 The comparison of the normalised vectors obtained through the Johansen and Bierenes approaches will be left for furtherresearch.
21 Interestingly, this result is contrary to the findings by Prockal. (2003) for the period 1986:10-2001:06.
22 However, this explanation does not emphasise the importance of the domestic currency's expected depreciation to explain theresult. I sustain, following models such as Krugman (1979), that agents increase real cash balances after a depreciation of thedomestic currency only if they do not expect further depreciations. Following this statement, it is possible to suggest that after1991:04 agents perceive exchange rate corrections as a once-and-for-all phenomena. Thus, this could be a symptom of theconfidence that agents have in the monetary policies carried out recently by the economic authorities and, indirectly, in thedomestic currency. The validity of this hypothesis is an interesting issue for further research.
23 Assuming the existence of a flexible exchange rate in the economy and some degree of capital mobility, a positive monetaryshock will tend to depreciate the domestic currency. As agents tend to increase real balance holdings in this scenario, it ispossible to have a reinforcement of the original monetary shock and, thus, the effect on Y could be more persistent.
24 See Christianoal. (1998) for a review.
25 In particular, I found the interest rate puzzle, which refers to a situation in which an increase (decrease) in the money supplypositively (negatively) affects the interest rate.
26 For a review of the economic puzzles see Christianoal. (1998).
27 This paper's main contributions are: (i) The model includes the exchange rate from an individual country perspective, and (ii)The results found were robust through different identification schemes.
28 The exogenous series were obtained from the International Financial Statistics made available from DataStream.
29 Peersman and Smets (2001, p.16) specifically indicated that "(...) the exchange rate, being an asset price, reacts immediately toall the other innovations (...)," which supports the previous interpretation.
30 The response standard errors of each IRF were constructed considering 3000 draws by Monte Carlo Integration.