The question raised was the precise amount of tax to be paid for the benefit received. The Court of Appeal held the cost for the employer, i.e., school was the average cost and gave a ruling in favour of the school; and the House of Lords reversed the opinion deciding in favour of the taxpayers i.e., the cost of benefit was the marginal cost; and for doing this it relied on parliamentary debates, or
The ratio laid down in the case was reference to
where there is an ambiguity or obscurity as to the meaning of the legislation or when the literal meaning leads to absurdity; and
the statement is the statement of a minister or other promoter of the bill; and
the statement relied is clear.
The importance of the case lies in that, the court had to decide if they could have recourse to 9 of the Bill of Rights (1688), i.e., "the freedom of speech, and debates or proceedings in the Parliament, ought not to be impeached or questioned in any court or place out of Parliament." (The judges ruled out any infringement of Art. 9)
 It is one of the extrinsic aids to statutory interpretation, now widely considered after this famous decision.
Statutory interpretation is the process by which the courts attach meaning to a particular statute in a case before it. There are three rules of statutory interpretation: -
 This can be used only if literal meaning leads to absurdity.
Though they are referred to as rules, they are only guiding principles. And they have to be used in the order of priority.
There are two approaches to interpretation:
The English Law is said to use the literal approach to interpretation. But now, for matters concerning the European Community (EC) legislation and also the domestic legislation designed to implement Community legislation purposive approach is adopted.
The courts never permitted using
In the case of
But when the case went before the House of Lords Lord Scarman reversed the judgement and said that use of parliamentary material did not promote clarity and was unreliable and hence not to be used. This was the position on until the decision in The House of Lords reversed its earlier decisions in
Lord Browne- Wilkinson, delivering the leading judgement in the case said:
This suggests that in case of any ambiguity, instead of giving a wrong interpretation of Parliamentary intention, the court can have recourse to parliamentary debates. The courts have, after all to give effect to the Parliament's intention. But this has to be construed very strictly and used only in the cases set out above and when the other internal aids fail to give meaning.
But there is one major drawback of the use of While I accede to this view I feel that since parliamentary materials are to be used only in limited cases as set out in the decision it will not lead to increased costs in all cases. But this is not always true as can be seen from a multitude of cases where lawyers have tried to use
Another drawback, as argued by the commentators is that by using the words of the ministers, they may get the power to make laws. This goes against the separation of powers between the Executive and the Judiciary. It is also thought of as encroaching upon the judicial functions.
The cases where But there were cases where
In Held, it could be used to determine the purpose of the statute. Similarly, in the case of But it was held that it was not appropriate for the court to use
In conclusion I submit that though Another important aspect to be noted is the ministers have to now take greater care to see that what they say reflects the purpose of the Act and this involves greater time and money for the Parliament since it has to look at all the notes and see to it that it does not include unnecessary material since the court may rely upon these in future. Not only this, the use of