Systech Intl.'s proposal states that it is a start - up company giving AMC 's (Annual Maintenance Contracts) and IT services. It also is an authorized service centre for Dell and IBM. The company's major services include maintaining networks, PC's, databases etc. and also giving software consultancy on mainly sale & purchase of ERP software. In view of the following points taken from the proposal, modifications/further suggestions have been made in the subsequent chapters:
__The most eminent flaw seen in the proposal of Systech Intl. lied in the scope of the project. Though a substantial amount ( 700,000) of funds were provided, the ideas and scope chosen for the service were not big or imaginative enough so as to utilize the cash reserves profitably.
__Though the chosen sector of IT services holds promise, but inclusion of Annual Maintenance Contract (AMC's) services and service centres (IBM & Dell) makes the project less lucrative as the chances of developing a core competency diminishes.
__Out of all the services given by Systech Intl., the software services sector is the most viable but this fact is not built upon in the proposal where only a mere mention of ERP sale and purchase consultancy is given without delving on the intricacies involved.
__ Systech's proposal does include some innovative ideas like the Employee Development Programme (EDP), which provides the opportunity for two of its employees for further study. The categorization of services into Club, Premier and Economy is also a good way of giving solutions to each customer according to their needs.
The market for the software/IT services is highly competitive so targeting the right sectors and developing partnerships is critically important for any organization even more so for a start up like Systech Intl.
The following chapters have considered Systech Intl. to be purely a software services company providing service to primarilary SME's. It contains analysis, reflection, suitable recommendations and modifications to Systech Intl.'s business proposal.
Note: Systech Intl. will be called SI for the remaining course of the assignment.
Greenley (1986) suggests that the mission statement has several aims, including: to provide the purpose for the organization; to express the philosophy that will guide the business; the articulate the vision of where the firm will be in the future; to define the business domain, i.e., the customer groups and needs, and the technology to be employed; and to motivate employees by providing them with a clear sense of purpose and direction. (Blackwell encyclopedia dictionary of marketing, 1997, p. 135)
A mission statement gives a sense of direction to the organisation. The vision statement of SI was good and bad in parts. Though it did capture the essence of a services company i.e. to be customer focussed, it lacked the insight required to be the driving force behind the company.
The following mission statement, like the previous one, captures the essence of the relationship between SI and its customers while succinctly explaining the new focus area for the company.
As SI is a small software services start up company, its does not have huge infrastructure or support systems requirements, most of which will anyway be online. For the 20 employees of SI, besides the regular office infrastructure, a dynamic work environment infrastructure would be of paramount importance. E.H Schien mentioned in his book Organisational Psychology that the notion of a psychological contract implies that the individual has a variety of expectations of the organisation so taking cue; a relaxed work environment should prevail in SI. Provisions like snookering boards, gaming consoles and music rooms will be provided to the employees. Understanding the general dimensions of service organisations, SI can follow the ten dimensions of service quality - reliability, responsiveness, competence, access, coutesy, communication, credibility, security, understanding the customer, tangibles of service (like physical facilities). (Schneider and Bowen 1995, p.27) to help it attain highest levels of quality.
The basis of SI's growth is its relationship with its customers; hence CRM becomes its most important support system. But customer relationship is not as easy as it seem as Customer Relationship Management is not about new ways of giving discounts or a place to buy or sell cheaper but it is about using technology like internet that has the power to change the world to build mutually profitable relationships and strengthen the bond between a business and its customers. It will be important for SI to use CRM techniques to keep customers coming back to it. The techniques could be an offer reminder service, order status change alerts and a service that remembers past orders to make reordering easy (Newell 2000, p.80).
The diagram below shows the allocation of funds by SI in their business plan:
If we look at the allocation of the money, we find that it is a good budget as all aspects of the business have been taken care of like rent, salaries, Insurance, licensing etc. but there have been two flaws in budgeting:
1. The salaries considered have only been for six months with a logic that a substantial profit would be earned in the initial six months, leaving enough funds to pay the employees for the rest of the year.
2. Though the inclusion of corpus fund as a good idea, but the amount i.e.  200,000 is high. Some of the money could be utilised in sponsorships for local sporting events thereby creating a small buzz about SI.
Taking into account the above remarks the new budget allocation is shown below:
1. As figure 7 shows, most of the allocation is unchanged except salaries, which are calculated for the entire year now.
2. The Corpus Fund, which was conceived as an emergency money resource has been reduced by  50,000.
3. Money kept for future provisions like IPO's have been changed to being used for sponsorships as discussed in section 4.1.4, which has been allocated as 60,000.
4. The budget for marketing & promotions has been increased to  70,000, as it is important for SI to establish itself in the minds of its target customers, which can be done by promoting the company.
Through the various chapters of this report we have been trying to reason whether Systech international could establish itself in the market or fizzle out under intense competition. As we saw in the business environment chapter that the software sector is maturing and particularly the services market is highly competitive with so many small companies sweating against each other. But being a knowledge intensive industry, start ups like Systech International might be able to do really well by catching the industry unaware through an innovative way of providing service or investing in the future softwares.
Though lots of facts are still unknown about the company, like price strategy or demand for their services, but SYSTECH Intl. can definitely do well in the marketplace provided it: