The question of what determines long run economic growth has divided Macroeconomists over the last twenty years. According to Solows' neoclassical view, growth can only occur with the change of exogenous factors. Endogenous growth theorists suggest however that economic growth stems from a change from within the structures of the economy.
At the base both models share a set of common assumptions. Both production functions are of the form Y=F(A,K,L), i.e. Output is determined by the amount of (K)physical Capital (e.g. machinery or software), (L)Labour (effective labour force) and some parameter A (Total Factor Productivity), which comprises all exogenous factors influencing production, such as technological capabilities, market sector compositions or political systems. An augmented production function would include Human capital (H) as well.
By firstly describing the Solow model, secondly, analysing the most prominent of endogenous growth models, the AK model I will finally establish which model is the closest to reality by focusing my attention on their differences.
So far, only the income and capita What is of furthermore interest and directly comparable with the AK-model, is the question of what makes income
According to Solow it must be an external factor that changes production methods, i.e. political regimes, population growth or saving rates, always leading to new steady state levels. Endogenous growth theories imply that sustainable growth comes from within, through capital accumulation that will lead to more effects than just directly adding capital to income but by raising human capital as well.
A growth accounting procedure, as followed by Easterly and Levine (2001) speaks in favour of the neoclassical prediction. It has been found that Total Factor productivity accounts for over 50% of GDP growth in all major economies, as can be seen in the last column of Table 1
The argument however is not flawless. By looking at the data relating to South East Asia, capital and Labour accumulation (70% to 90 %) seem to play a more important role than TFP growth (up to 30%), which in turn would back the endogenous growth theory.
Furthermore the exogenous conception of growth development would imply that it is independent of the structural characteristics of the economy, since they are part of the "internal" (endogenous) economy. Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995) however found that the average growth rate of GDP is positively correlated to structural factors (education attainment, life expectancy and terms of trade)
Both these arguments against Solow and his neoclassical fellowship are dispossessed with the argument that TFP and hence external factors are the causation of higher capital accumulation and structural change.
In other words, input accumulation and structural factors are thus not necessarily as strongly related to GDP, because only an exogenous factor could have changed structures or input factors and in turn lead to higher GDP growth
Another element of debate, relates to the diverging assumptions of returns to capital. In 1987 D. Romer found that the elasticity of income with respect to capital was larger than the share of capital income in value added This would imply constant or even increasing returns to scale.
These findings however failed to take into account the upward bias these regressors have, since every shock in output is met with an accumulation of inputs, as argued by Benhabib and Jovanovic in 1991. In line with the human capital augmented Solow model brought forward by Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992), that spreads the decreasing effects of capital over human and physical capital, overall empiric data and analysis now generally backs the idea of decreasing returns to capital.
As already described in the first section, there is little doubt that the notion of conditional convergence draws a realistic picture of economic development. Romer, Mankiw and Weil (1992) find however that "all is not well for the Solow model": the speed of convergence is faster than the neoclassical model suggests (0.7 instead of 0.3). Extending the Solow model with human capital leads them to support the idea of conditional convergence, where the effects of decreasing returns to capital are now spread over physical and human capital
Table 2 shows the regression results of Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992). The negative coefficients on Output in 1960 (lnY60) prove the existence of conditional convergence, since they underline Solows' theoretical predictions: The higher the initial value of income, the lower the growth rate. The inclusion of the investment GDP ratio (i.e. savings) and a comprised factor of population growth and depreciation (ln(n+ Countries with higher saving-levels ad lower population growth will experience starker GDP growth.
Three main theoretical differences are at the base of the diverging views relating to growth: (a) Econometric literature overall supports the neoclassical idea of decreasing returns to scale, which are unlike initially assumed encompassed by both the growth of physical and human capital. The Solow model seems to find support on the idea of (b) conditional convergence as well. Simple scatter graphs and Romer, Mankiw and Weil show that homogeneous countries do tend to grow in different paces, which lets them all converge towards one steady state.
Concerning (c) the determinants of long run growth, it seems as though endogenous growth theorists have a more valid explanation by emphasising that growth can come from structural changes within the economy. Growth is thus not an external factor forced upon an economy, but much more a consequence of its policies, structures and behaviour.