In a cross sectional data analysis for 40 low to middle income countries, I firstly underline Kwasi Fosus' findings concerning the impact of manufacturing exports on GDP growth.
Secondly find what elements determine manufacturing exports and thus what implications these might have on policy making.
In a first step I will analyse the effect of manufacturing exports in a production function type framework for 40 low to middle income countries over the period 1985-2000. With a new regression equation I will secondly investigate what factors determine manufacturing export growth from a supply side point of view, which will finally allow me to put forward policy implications that would lead to an improvement in the level of manufacturing exports and hence GDP growth.
Economic theory suggests that Exports contribute to economic growth. Export development allows the home country to concentrate investment on those sectors where it enjoys a comparative advantage. The larger global market will then firstly allow for economies of scale and thus higher levels of production. Secondly the world wide competition pressure put on home industries once entering the international market is likely to reduce inefficient capital utilization and promote technology diffusion, higher skilled labour and improved management skills. This will allow for an improvement in Total factor productivity and hence support economic growth.
There have been several studies in the 1960's and 1970's that found a positive correlation between GDP growth and exports (Emery (1967), Maizels (1968) and Kravis (1970)).
M. Michaely (1977) however points out that by using absolute values for export-data as done by his predecessors, autocorrelation between exports and GDP growth will inevitably occur, since exports themselves are part of national output. To overcome this export bias, Michaely suggests that data representing the proportionate change of exports in GDP should be used. His results for 41 countries over the period 1950-1973 show positive correlation between GDP growth and proportionate export growth, albeit with a smaller Spearman rank coefficient (0.380) than earlier studies.
Still today, the causality between exports and GDP growth to which Michaely refers to in his paper seems not to have found a clear cut answer. As exports are a major component of GDP, causality may run from exports to growth or vice versa. A number of sizeable recent empirical works, which studied several groups of less developed countries, have found no conclusive evidence on the causal relationship between exports and growth in these countries (Richards, D.G. (2001) and Begum and Shamsuddin (1998)).
The importance of export composition was first analysed by Syron and Walsh (1968), dividing their data of developing countries in three different categories: (a) high food content in exports (66% or higher), (b) moderate food content (between 33 and 66%) and low food content in exports (less than 33%). Results of their findings showed that correlations between GDP and export growth were nil for the first category, positive in the second and positive and even larger in the third group. From this follows that countries exporting other than primary products will benefit more from exports than agricultural exporters. This leads the authors to conclude that "in order to benefit from exports an economy must have a minimum level of industrialisation"4.
The use of bivariate correlation between exports and GDP growth however faces two fundamental criticisms. First, since exports are a component of GDP, there is strong bias in favour of a correlation between them. Second, such bivariate tests do not take into account the effects of other relevant factors on economic growth.
Michalopouos and Jay (1973) are the first to estimate the effects of exports on economic growth in a production function type framework with cross sectional data. After constructing a regression equation incorporating average exports growth as a systematic non-zero error term to the traditional factor inputs capital (average capital growth) and Labour (average labour growth), the authors show how exports contribute directly to output, while raising the explanatory power (R) of the estimated equation (1) to a considerable extent.
Based on this framework  Feder (1981) as well as Balassa (1984) go one step further in their cross sectional analysis of less developed countries, by outlining the implications of different trade policies.
Feder (1981) suggests that non export sectors exhibit smaller marginal productivities than export sectors do. These differences are likely to arise from externalities (i.e. competition pressure, technological change, economies of scale, etc.) that are enabled when governments follow export oriented policies. Moreover, Balassa (1984) comes to the conclusion that by introducing the share of manufactured exports as a new independent variable explanatory power (R) of the regression equation is increased.
Kwasi Fosu (1991) argues however that by entering manufacture share separately, Balassa (1984) assumes exports invariant of export composition. By including export composition into the economic growth equation interactively with the growth of exports (manX.X), Kwasi Fosu vindicates the idea, that export composition is not extraneous. In other words, the impact of growth expansion itself depends on export composition.
At the base of his analysis is an "export-augmented"- production function that, differentiated and slightly alternated, yields:
(1)
Where L is labour growth, K capital growth and X export growth.
Kwasi Fosu raises the explanatory power (from 0.53 to 0.54) of the regression equation by adding the interactive variable ((manX)X)), resulting in the following:
(2)
Where (manX) X is the share of manufactured exports multiplied by export growth.
Given the authors' regression result for 64 middle income countries over the period 1960 to 1980, one can conclude that the manufacturing exports play a more decisive role in economic growth than any other type of exports do.
There has only been few time series data analysis concerning the impact of export composition on economic growth. The importance of lagged dependent variables has been introduced in the production function type framework in the early 1990's.
Most time series studies have focused their attention on the effect of business cycles on exports. It has been shown that exports of manufactured products are much less cyclically sensitive than exports of primary commodities. Greenawayal. (1999) constructed a panel of 69 countries and found that those developing countries that specialized in manufactured products were more likely to benefit from export-led growth than those which specialized in food or other primaries.
I have decided to analyse the time period of 1985-2000. In line with most other papers relating GDP growth to exports, I used cross sectional data of average levels over the period 1985-2000.
I opted to analyse the effect of exports on growth for 40 developing countries with low to middle
income levels, instead of upper middle income levels. The lack of infrastructure in these economies might lead one to prematurely conclude that a manufacturing export industry will not be able to develop. The data shows however that the share of manufacturing exports (ManX) measured in percent of overall exports is surprisingly high with a mean of 37.41 %.
The mean average GDP growth per capita of (
Y) 1.01% and high average Labour force growth (
L) of 21.37% furthermore underline the low development levels of the analysed economies.
Gross capital formation (
K), measured in percentage change, shows a mean of 5.83, with data ranging from -12% to 33%. A very likely reason for the divergence in capital growth is the inclusion of war torn economies in the selection of my data (e.g. Albania, Benin, Papua New Guinea, etc...) that will most likely have experienced a fall in their capital stock during war-periods and thus negative capital growth.
Since the data for gross formation of Capital has shown minor insignificancies in my regressions, I have opted to add another variable that codetermines the formation of capital, namely gross domestic savings (S) measured in percentage of GDP. The surprisingly low level of correlation (0.112, see appendix) between capital formation and savings might be explained by the fact that only domestic savings are considered instead of national savings. A severe lack of data for national savings of less developed countries forced me to use data of domestic savings.
Over the period 1985-2000 exports (
X) grew by an average 6.25% in the 40 countries analysed. The data suggests that all countries (except for Kazakhstan) have benefited from an increase in exports over the last 15 years.
Table 1 summarises the most important descriptive statistics for the data. More detailed descriptions can be found in the appendix.
Three more variables are introduced in the second part of the main analysis. Foreign direct investment (fdi) is measured in percentage of GDP and exhibits a mean of 3.230. The variable lnW measures the percentage of overall expenditure spent on wages and salaries. The data shows a low standard deviation (0.6), resulting from similar wage expenditure patterns. Finally, electricity production measured in kWh per capita and denoted as elp has a very high standard deviation, since electricity producers as well as electricity importers are considered in my sample. (Table 2 shows basic features of data, see appendix for further information).
The results of my analysis suggest in a first instance that exports and more importantly manufactured exports play a crucial role for economic growth in less developed economies. This suggestion finds its proof in the regression equation (C), where the inclusion of manufactured exports raised the explanatory power substantially. Moreover, by dividing my sample in high and low manufacturing exporters, one can see that their respective correlation coefficients of exports and GDP growth differ to a large extent. After regressing the share of manufactured exports on wage expenditure, electricity production, exports and foreign direct investment, I come to the conclusion that governments should pursue an outward oriented policy that channels investment into the manufacturing sector. Governments are furthermore well advised to privatize energy markets and keep wage expenditure at a low level to fully benefit from the effect manufacturing exports have on Output.