Organisational culture influences individual and group behaviour and it can be managed to facilitate success within groups and organisations. There has been academic debate whether highly integrated organisational culture, "strong" organisational culture is a key factor in success. It can be argued that stimulation of individuals within the organisation to high performance and contribution to their well-being is feasible for any organisation. Thus, finding a suitable organisational culture is important in human resources management (HRM) considerations. However, the precise nature of an appropriate organisational culture is disputable, for example the official descriptions of companies do not reflect how the life as a part of the organisation is perceived by individuals and groups. In the light of cases in organisational culture it is possible to derive support to both sides of the academic debate. Nevertheless, the extent of integration of the ideal organisational culture seems to be limited, even though there is a clear case for ensuring the element of control in a successful organisational culture.
In order to understand the scope of "strong" organisational culture, the concept of organisational culture has to be clarified. Schein defined organisational culture in his work:
Schein's definition is broad and it can be rather easily observed that the definition allows a wide inclusion of factors into concept of organisational culture.
However, "strong" organisational cultures have distinguishing characteristics. Firstly and most importantly, the vision of the organisational culture is strict in "strong" cultures, as Rosenfeld and Wilson define it:
It must be noticed here that Wilson is a critic of so-called "excellence school" that is in favour of "strong"-culture theory. But, it is clear that the definitive characteristic of "strong" culture is the drive for integration and it discourages anything that is in contradiction of its perceived essence. Secondly, in "strong" cultures there is a certain level of control to discourage devious behaviour. Methods used to discourage particular types of behaviour are often sanctions and failures to reward.
The integrity in "strong" cultures must be enforced, it is arguably not self-sustaining, as sub-cultures will eventually develop and deviate from the original culture. Porter et al argued that there is an observable connection in numerous cases of a "strong" organisational culture accompanied with financial success and increased competitiveness. Porter et al based their arguments on findings of Sorensen, who found empirical evidence of existence of a relationship between "strong" cultures and financial success.
On the contrary, Wilson has argued already in 1992 that similar conclusion can be reached, but the underlying theoretical issues are supported by questionable empirical evidence; his argumentation was a reply to such findings by Kotter et al.
I) Numerous good companies fail to sustain success
II) There are alternative ways to corporate success, such as monopoly
III) Most studies have poor sampling and represent only view of top managers
IV) All industries do not provide such empirical evidence
There are clearly cases that favour his view about the limitations of empirical evidence. However, there is no explicit empirical evidence suggesting that a "strong" culture does not matter.
In sum, it is possible to identify benefits and downsides in the organisational culture. In the light of academic debate, the uses of a "strong" organisational culture can be empirically shown, but the limitations are rather complex. Therefore, these are discussed below using case evidence.
Even though the cases below are primarily about the "strong" organisational culture, the three models of corporate culture and organisational performance can be identified in the cases below. In addition to "strong" culture theory, there is "culture-fit" theory, which encourages adaptation to the values of environment, but paying attention to the internal values as well. Secondly, in so-called "adaptive-culture" theory the values of the culture are seen as tools of adapting to change in the environment. The characteristics of the three theories can be overlapping as well in some cases they can be mutually inclusive, i.e. they all can be observed in a "strong" culture.
A classic case of a "strong" organisational culture is Ford Motor Company. The organisational culture of the car manufacturing giant was very "strong" in the early twentieth century, it did not allow deviations from the rules of the organisation. To illustrate, in 1913 turnover was 423% in spite of relatively high wages. Hence, high level of control can cause negative impact on individuals and this speaks against "strong" organisational cultures.
However, there is evidence that lack of control can be harmful, as the members of organisation can act as they please. This can be depicted in the example of skin and body products retailer The Body Shop. The majority of The Body Shop's outlets are franchises and there is a very limited amount of control, the franchisees can sell their own related products and modify the store concept, which has been a key to their success. The organisational culture is a means of management and the managers should appreciate and manage it rather than to let the culture to guide themselves. Organisations such as The Body Shop claim that their success is largely based on freedoms of the franchisees and this is clearly the case. Thus, some level of control is certainly needed and this is in favour of "strong" organisational culture.
The organisational culture has an impact on the groups within the organisation and their decision-making; it can be argued that role of organisational culture is larger the "stronger" the culture is. The case of Body Shop implies that freedom of the group-decision making is beneficial. However, it is not straightforward whether the bias resulting from the organisational culture is beneficial or detrimental. In conclusion, the analysis of "strong" organisational culture has to be applied on a case-by-case basis.
Assessment of the benefits and downsides of "strong" organisational cultures has limitations. It is clear that the evaluation in the academic debate is often based on solely financial factors. For example, in his work Greenberg describes Starbucks as a healthy organisational culture, due to its low turnover. This implies that wider considerations of all levels, individual, group, organisational and environmental, should be made about judgement of the success of an organisational culture. Starbucks might be a profitable organisation, but the negative economic externalities sourcing from their failure to respond to the needs of their environment reduces dramatically the value of Starbucks as an example of a successful "strong" organisational culture.
There are cases and academic work explicitly supporting "strong" organisational cultures, but the limitations to this view do exist. Element of control seems to be the most crucial and disputable one, but there is a demand for a certain level of control in order to ensure that the employees work towards the goals agreed on by management. However, excessive control causes discomfort amongst individuals and groups leading into reduced motivation to work. Nevertheless, managers must make their choices about HRM solutions and try to adjust the organisational culture to what is most suitable for them, as it is by no means clear whether to choose "strong" culture or not. It is not likely that the academic debate will be solved in favour of one side or the other, as the real world is one of diversity and uncertainty and therefore, the power of models is restricted.