The United States of America (US) is no doubt the leading market economy in the world and therefore it is clear that fluctuations in it attract interest, especially signs of slowdown. Throughout the 1990s the US was performing strong in terms of economy, but recently there has been a downturn. Especially the year 2001 was difficult, because the financial markets were suffering of lack of confidence and terrorist attacks further deepened the problem. Yet, there have not been any significant signs of recovery, even though it can be argued that there are prospects for a good economic year 2005 in the US. Nevertheless, oil price is a factor that can endanger the positive development in the economy and in can pose a problem in the trade deficit that the country struggles with. In addition, weak dollar might further deepen this difficulty. The uncertainty of the US economy is reflected on the other economies of the world, particularly on the Asian ones, but Euro Area has suffered from the fluctuations as well. Here, the main economic issues are dealt and the past, present and the future of the US economy is evaluated.
The 1990s was a period of growth and economic boom in the US. This result is partly related to the optimism that the end of Cold War created in the world economy. The US was growing strongly due to emergence of new technology, which became known amongst the economists as "the new economy" boom. There was a sustained increase in the growth of productivity, which was largely explained by new inventions. These inventions induced massive investment and the confidence in the financial markets was high.
It can be argued that between the years 1992-2000 there was a virtuous circle of economy in the US. The US gross domestic product (GDP) was growing fast and this facilitated a growth in investment, which in turn caused GDP to grow. As interest rates were low, high investment was made possible. The multiplier-accelerator action in the US was strong and the information technology (IT) industry was booming until the year 2000.
Moreover, the extensive growth in the US economy caused capital inflows and this resulted into a deficit in the current account in the US as its net foreign investment was negative.
A factor relating to imports must be mentioned here, namely oil. The energy prices increased during the years 1999 and 2000 Oil price reached in real terms the levels of the 1970s Oil Crisis. This factor increased the costs of production and further widened the trade deficit. The crash of IT sector, current account deficit and increasing energy prices were inevitably leading in to a financial crisis in the US stock markets.
Investors were liquidating their portfolios and buying bonds. Bond prices were increasing as a result of uncertain moods in the financial markets, leading in to increasing interest rates. As interest rate, the price of money, became higher there was insufficient investment to sustain the production. Output figures fell and unemployment started to grow. Not surprisingly falling income, increasing unemployment and high interest rates resulted in to cut in the consumer demand.
No doubt the strong decrease of IT sector was the main reason to the financial crisis, but the virtuous circle had turned in to a vicious circle of falling investment figures and fall in confidence. The US economy was stagnating in the early 2001, but there were expectations of a recovery in the year 2002. Straightforwardly, the oil prices increased and the prices have remained high ever since, but this issue was not evident in 2001. Hence, the lack of confidence and terrorist attacks caused more problems in the financial markets. In conclusion, economic year 2001 in the US was an unsuccessful one.
The US government used extensive fiscal and monetary policy in order to tackle the problems of the crisis. The prevailing theme on the fiscal side was tax cuts, which was strongly advocated in public by the Bush regime.
The aim of fiscal policy used was straightforward. The consumer spending was to be encouraged. As consumers have more disposable income, they will spend more. This is because the marginal propensity to consume is higher than marginal propensity to save, except in some rather rare circumstances. Consumer demand has a large importance in the US. It is around 60% of the GDP Consumer demand recovered during the 2002 accordingly to the use of the fiscal policy.
In contrast, on the monetary side, the Federal Reserve Board decreased interest rate known as "Federal Funds Rate (FFR)" in order to encourage spending and investment. But this aim was arguably not easy to achieve. Throughout the latter half of 1990s, the FFR had remained flat, but from the end of the year 2000 to the end of 2001 the FFR was dropped from 6% to 1.5%. Though, there are limitations such as the investment growth was still negative. In the light of this evidence, it is clear that this was a turning point.
The year 2003 was a year of cautious confidence, as the US economy was performing better. Even though, it was argued that the US economy " The recovery was slow, yet it was a positive sign. Nevertheless, the net trade deficit was building up during 2003.
In 2004 the US economy was still growing The oil prices were further increasing and its impact on the world economy, and the US in particular, was increasingly important. Unemployment in the US is yet at sustainable levels, but there is risk for growing unemployment figures. The increased exports to the European Union and Asia, especially to China are likely to reduce this deficit. But if it is considered whether the economic situation in the US has improved since the crisis of 2001, the answer is yes.
Thus, the world economy has an impact on the US, but the effect is mutual and the role of the US cannot be ignored when investigating the near future of the world economy. The Euro Area and the United Kingdom have suffered from the depreciating exchange rate of the dollar and the impact of uncertain US economy on Asian countries has been even greater.
Firstly, it is clear that the development of imports from the Asia to the US is likely to be high in 2005. It has negative implications, as the US trade deficit remains strong, and as mentioned, the Asian economies might suffer from overheating.
Secondly, as the oil prices have remained high, around $40 a barrel, the risk to the world economy is greater than for the US itself, as argued above, the decreasing long term interest rates offer protection for the US output. Hence, it can be argued that the world economy is more vulnerable to the downturn resulting from high oil prices, rather than the US. However, the US is a net exporter of oil, so it would be an exaggeration to state that the oil price is not a significant factor regarding the US GDP.
Thirdly, the politics must not be ignored here. Bush regime has announced that its plan is to reduce growth.
The US economy has arguably gone through a strong boom followed by a rapid recession since the early 1990s, but there is no clear indication how the economy will perform during the year 2005. There is a cautious optimism as the US economic policy seems to work so far, but the danger posed by budget and trading deficits, weak dollar and high oil prices indicates that there are no grounds for confidence yet. The World Economy is in a volatile state and the implications that the performance of the US economy has on the world, particularly on Asia, are not clearly seen. The stock markets show uncertainty, but the consumer confidence is recovering. Much depends on the economic policy of the US government, whether they succeed in their attempts to keep inflation low and interest rates at appropriate levels. It is not clear whether the slowdown is about to end, or to get worse. The prospects for the year 2005 are still questionable and indicate in my opinion that the slowdown has not reached its end yet.