It is controversial - but probably not an exaggeration - to state that "The European Council does not play a formal role in the Community decision-making and does not constitute an institution hierarchically superior to the Community Institutions" in the light of examples from European Union law and Community decision-making. However, it is clear that the validity of the statement is limited to an extent, because there is evidence that the European Council in fact interferes with the Community decision-making process. Therefore, limitations to the statement arising from contradicting evidence are discussed with relevant Community law. Firstly, the role of the European Council is compared with the executive and administrative Community Institutions. Secondly, the related institutional hierarchy is investigated, which is, thirdly, followed by evaluation of the realities of Community decision-making processes. Finally, it is obvious that the statement has underlying political implications and these are discussed, although briefly because the emphasis is on the legal perspective, but the need for reform is dealt with in the conclusion of the essay. Hence, a critical viewpoint to the statement is established.
The role of the European Council in the Community decision-making process is rather broadly defined in the Treaties and it is important to contrast it with those of the Community Institutions in order to form a more realistic picture. When the executive and administrative roles of authority in the EU are considered, we can limit the number of the Institutions we are dealing with: the European Commission, the Council of European Union (the Council) and the European Council. Problems result from their similar areas of competence; the balance of power between them has been widely debated. Now, the role of the European Council and the extent of its powers is discussed and contrasted with the other two executive and administrative Community institutions.
The hierarchical superiority of the European Council to the Community Institutions cannot be found in Treaties, but evidence suggests that a degree of political superiority exists. Not surprisingly, the hierarchical position of the European Council has provoked debate.The Commission has phrased concerns about the increasing influence of the European Council:
Clearly, it is not a misperception that in practice the influence of the European Council has been growing. Therefore, alterations in the balance of power may lead to superiority of the European Council.
In contrast it has been argued that the hierarchy of the Community Institutions excludes the European Council:
This supports the statement under discussion; under legal definitions the European Council is intergovernmental organisation not directly part of the supranational framework of the Community Institutions.
Moreover, Jean Monnet made an observation on the Community authority:
He argues that the intergovernmental European Council has the greatest authority instead of the supranational institutions. Thus, the European Council has its role of supreme authority exists in a different framework, which supports the view that the European Council does not constitute an institution hierarchically superior to the Community Institutions.
The importance of conception of hierarchy in the Community has been challenged by various authors. For example, Bermann and Craig have argued that the significance of unambiguous hierarchy is overstated, because it is relevant only in terms of public identity. However, it is clear that public identity does matter, as lack of transparency and democratic legitimacy are arguably problems in the Community decision-making.
The conclusion is that from the legal perspective the European Council does not constitute an organisation hierarchically superior to the Community Institutions. The European Council has arguably acted beyond the powers that have been conferred to it in the Treaties and there have been concerns that its influence has become too wide. Therefore, the influence of the European Council in Community decision-making is discussed below.
Obviously, there are examples of the European Council influencing Community decision-making process. However, according to the Treaties the European Council has no powers in Community law-making, although the decision-making process in the EC is elitist and the European Council consists of top representatives of the Member States.
There is evidence that the European Council has influenced Community decision-making beyond its powers:
The implication is that the European Council influences the Community decision-making processes, but it cannot do so within the powers that have been granted to it in the Treaties and hence formal decisions are taken by the other executive Community Institutions.
In support of this view Lenaerts et al. argued that: "in practice [the Council] only gives a legal effect to what the European Council has already decided on the political level." The European Council decides to an extent about the policies of the Council, which then legalises the decision. Nevertheless, the Council has no legal obligation to obey their decisions but there is a political obligation as the ministerial members are from the same governments.
Interestingly, the Commission has suggested that: "[T]he European Council no longer serves just to provide general impetus and arbitrate on specific issues: although the Treaties do not confer on it any explicit decision-making powers, it has become a genuine political decision-maker in practice." This observation identifies decision-making processes in the EU which are not based on the legal powers set out in Treaties, but on political influences.
Furthermore, the Commission gives an example where regulations falling under the competence of the Community Institutions were agreed on by the European Council without the Community procedures, which most certainly falls under the competence of the Commission and the Council.
It might be an exaggeration to say that the Commission is trying to understate the importance of such agreement, but clearly, it can be seen that the European Council interferes with an area that is more likely within Commission's competence. Thus, there is evidence that the European Council has influence in the Community decision-making exceeding those powers defined in the Treaties.
Moreover, Tillotson et al. argue that: "[The European Council] is not itself normally engaged in formal Treaty legislative and political co-operation processes." It seems logical that the interference of the European Council in the Community decision-making process is the exception, but that should not devalue the importance of those interferences. Interestingly, Tillotson et al. clearly suggest that the European Council can take part in formal decision-making processes.
Adopting a similar view, Bast argues that: "the European Council does not adopt laws... thus its law-making (or, nominally, decision-making) is not subject to the heightened scrutiny." It is crucial to note here that the European Council in fact takes part in the legislative process, but it cannot be held accountable or reviewed.
Craig goes even further in his argument and has stated:
It has to be agreed on that the political reality is a major factor in the decision-making, not just the legal arguments.
In conclusion, if only legal considerations are taken into account, then the statement under discussion is valid, but the arguments above show that there is a need notice the political and practical implications. The interferences of the European Council with the Community decision-making processes are not based on Community legislation and hence give a rise to concerns, which are addressed next.
The statement under discussion was phrased by Lenaerts et al. in their work Constitutional Law of the European Union
 and it is clear that their statement is subject to limitations. Thus, there are underlying reasons to take such point of view.
Surprisingly, it can be agreed that the acts of the European Council are not subject to judicial review in the European Court of Justice. The direct implication is that the accountability of the European Council is limited, and therefore, a need for reform arises. That is relevant here because Koen Lenaerts is a judge in the European Court of Justice (ECJ) and it is likely that his motive to make the statement is to call for a reform. In support of this view, it has been argued that ECJ judges try to maintain the ECJ's institutional position and "extend the ambit of their jurisprudence". This supports the view that the statement under discussion is to an extent political. The ECJ judges are concerned for interferences and the lack of accountability of the European Council, which contributes to democratic deficit. However, the approach taken by Lenaerts et al. is not necessarily right. There has been argument that legal isolation of the European Council from the decision-making processes will discourage citizens' identification with the Union.
The likely purpose of the statement is to argue for reform - based on the Treaties the statement is arguably valid, but in reality it is not. The Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe attempted to remedy some of the problems, but it is highly questionable whether the Constitution will ever be ratified. The lack of clarity remains.
In conclusion it has been satisfied that from a legal perspective: "The European Council does not play a formal role in Community decision-making and does not constitute an institution hierarchically superior to the Community Institutions." Nevertheless, it is not straightforward to define the absolute extent of the powers of the European Council, as the various examples supra have shown. It has been shown that there are both legal and political aspects to the role of the European Council in the Community decision-making as well as in the institutional hierarchy of the Community. However, there is no evidence in the Treaties that the European Council could play a formal role in the Community decision-making, which largely justifies the statement under discussion. When making the statement, it is likely Lenaerts et al. were calling for more clarity and reform in the Community decision-making process, but following the rejection of the Constitutional Treaty, it seems that such cohesion cannot be achieved with the present legislation. Again, an argument for reform of the Community decision-making process can be invoked.