The supply-side macroeconomic debate between Keynesians and monetarists has continued throughout our post-modern time. The extreme Keynesian views about the shape of aggregate supply (AS) curve have been challenged as a result of the emergence of monetarist and moderate Keynesian thought. This is a problem, because it would be beneficial for a government to know how the nature of AS affects the success of a chosen fiscal or monetary policy. Surprisingly, there is no absolute certainty about the shape of the short run AS curves. Moderate thinkers have tried to adjust the extreme Keynesian model of AS curve into a more empirically accurate form whereas the monetarists have challenged the fundamentals of Keynesian model. In this essay, the starting point for discussion is the extreme Keynesian view: vertical long-run aggregate supply curve (LRAS) combined with a horizontal short-run aggregate supply curve (SRAS), which can be combined into an L-shaped curve. In sum, I aim to challenge the extreme Keynesian AS model. Like all models, it is a rough representation of reality and due to its rigidity it is highly disputable.
According to the extreme Keynesian view, there is a vertical LRAS and a horizontal SRAS curve. The AS curve model plots the quantity of goods and services supplied in an economy at a certain price level. Hence, the AD/AS model is an important tool for economists. Not surprisingly, the absence of unambiguous empirical data about AS is the main reason for controversy in supply-side economics.
The vertical LRAS model was created by the classical economists; however, they were focused on explaining the long run only and not analysing short run economic fluctuations. Clearly, this level of output can occur at various price levels (
Classical economists argue that in the long run " This observation can be written:
Where: The function depends on technological process.
Therefore, Another important implication is that the production has a physical limit set by F(K,L). Given that all prices are flexible, it follows that the prices will adjust to any changes in demand.
Although Keynes famously stated: "
The Keynesians assume that the prices take time to adjust in changes in demand in the short run; Therefore, the SRAS curve shown below is horizontal.
In the above model, short-run changes in demand affect
Hence:
Thus, the short-run case is the opposite of the long-run model.
The LRAS and SRAS models have now been explained and it was shown that in the extreme model the short run output level is affected by changes in AD, whereas the long run output is not. The antithetical nature of these two models brings along questions: what happens when we move from the short-run to the long-run? The extreme Keynesian explanation is shown below.
 The policy implication is that fiscal policy is effective and no complete crowding-out of private investment occurs. Hence, expansionary fiscal and monetary policies increase In Keynesian analysis, wages are important and I will briefly discuss the wage-price relation relevant to this debate.
Given a perfectly elastic SRAS curve, it can be observed that if AD shifts outwards from 1 to 2, This can be clarified graphically:
As AD shifts from 1 to 2 in Graph C, the iso-wage curve shifts from W1 to W2 and given Thus, wages are procyclical. However, this observation is based on L-shaped AS curve, which is a rigid assumption. Hence I will discuss alternatives to extreme Keynesian model.
The extreme Keynesian view is based on strong assumptions and therefore its correlation with reality is reduced. Many academics have challenged the extreme Keynesian views on the AS curves, because there is controversial empirical evidence. The extreme model was developed further by the moderate Keynesians.
Empirical evidence must be considered to evaluate the models above. It is clear that there is a little if any conclusive empirical research regarding the models. Before the evaluation, the condition for long-run equilibrium is established. In his work, Mankiw sets out equilibrium requirements graphically:
In all long-run equilibrium points, LRAS, SRAS and AD curve must intersect, such as in point (a) in graph G. In the graph, SRAS shifts from 1 to 2, causing an increase in price level to The new short-run equilibrium is at (b) - there is stagflation: unemployment and According to Mankiw, these kinds of adverse supply shocks have been empirically observed and they have been caused by e.g. oil crisis in 1970s. The policy implication is that the markets will not immediately adjust to supply shocks and the government can use demand-side policies to restore Interestingly, the horizontal model of SRAS as set in graph B was created based on observations about the Great Depression,
In contrast, the monetarist ideas gained impetus during the 1970s oil crisis. Monetarist explained the phenomenon by relating it to their vertical SRAS/LRAS model (see graph F above). Government attempts to increase AD were leading to an increased In spite of widespread popularity of monetarist ideas and Milton Friedman's persuasive statement that " The limitation to their view is that there seems to be a trade-off between inflation and unemployment. On the other hand, Friedman was content to argue that the trade-off is temporary and not permanent.
Moderate Keynesians argue that even if the trade-off between inflation and unemployment is temporary, it is significant enough. They believe that the adjustment process of markets takes unacceptably long - and that the short-run trade-off matters as illustrated below.
The upward sloping section in the model above indicates that there is a trade-off between inflation and unemployment. Movement from AD1 via AD2 to AD3 shows increasing inflation and decreasing unemployment. In his work Blanchard sets out the AS relation for upward sloping section algebraically:
This model was created based upon the developments of 1950s and 1960s - empirical evidence from that time period supports the moderate Keynesian model and it was almost unchallenged until the emergence of the 1970s crisis and monetarist thought.
The moderate Keynesian model seems more realistic than the extreme Keynesian, for two reasons. First reason is that the horizontal SRAS curve that Keynes observed during the Great Depression is accommodated in the moderate Keynesian model. The second reason is that the extreme Keynesian model cannot explain developments in the 1950s and 1960s and hence, it is too rigid a model to reflect the reality. In conclusion, I am content to argue that because of its higher correlation with empirical evidence, the moderate Keynesian view is superior to the extreme Keynesian view.
It seems inevitable that the academic debate about the shape of AS curves will continue further, because of the monetarist/Keynesian division. Nevertheless, it can be stated that horizontal SRAS curve combined with vertical LRAS curve is not very realistic view compared to its alternatives. In sum, there seems to be empirical evidence to give proof to all of the three models discussed above. It is interesting to observe how after several years of research the economic schools of thought disagree on some fundamental aspects of the AS analysis. Governments find themselves in a difficult position, because the models predict e.g. wage behaviour in different ways. Nevertheless, the extreme Keynesian view has lost many supporters and the academic consensus to the moderate view. I believe it is not a great exaggeration to say that the L-shaped model of the SRAS/LRAS curve is too rigid for the present day economic thought. However, it is clear that monetarists and Keynesians disagree, and the debate will continue for the foreseeable future.