Expansion of production to overseas locations offers opportunities, but one must never forget the possible pitfalls. This investigation concerns prospects of Allisgood plc, a conglomerate that plans to manufacture part of its production outside the UK. Cross-border expansion is a prosperous opportunity to exploit competitive advantages offered by foreign economies. It is clear that low cost and to some extent quality differentiation is important for Allisgood plc. Quality textiles is a high cost material and kitchen equipment manufacturing industry has relatively high labour intensity, thus, gains could be realised by expansion to foreign markets. However, legal considerations must be done in order to avoid setbacks and clearly, the legal aspects are complex when we consider contracting with foreign agents. Similarly, in conjunction with joint ventures conflicts between company regulations might arise. In case of other forms of strategy, financial aspects and notion of risk gain even more impetus. Furthermore, the sum of financial and legal results must be adjusted for factors arising from the nature of the location the business is expanding to. All factors mentioned above have relevance to the case of Allisgood plc due to the necessary strategic, location and finance considerations before the final decision of whether or not to move a part of production abroad.
There were three strategies of foreign expansion that were set for investigation, each of them having clear strengths and limitations. Hence, none of them seems to be a prevailing strategy. Strategic choices are to an extent a matter of organisational culture, which for a traditionally UK based firm such as Allisgood plc might be a complicated issue when expanding abroad
First strategy option suggested was acquisition of established foreign firms, which represents a choice that has arguably become a more popular strategic option over the past two decades. Also, there can be a group of existing customers, which are relevant to conglomerate businesses like Allisgood plc because the company's other products could be then directly marketed to them, allowing further expansion. Therefore, precise information must be gained to minimise information asymmetries. Furthermore, organisational problems might arise if the management of the acquired company is integrated to the decision-making structures and some resistance might arise from shaping the organisational cultures together.
Second strategy proposed was setting up a new overseas subsidiary. Although, there is strong contrast to the acquisition method discussed above, both are nevertheless relevant strategic options for Allisgood plc. A crucial advantage is that this method can be used to expand into a country that has no existing industry or on the other hand where no feasible acquisitions can be made due to various reasons. But at the same time there are concerns about no existing workforce or production machinery in place. In addition, knowledge of local business environment must be acquired, which implies incurring extra costs. However, this method is going to require a high amount of capital and also the risk burden is entirely on Allisgood plc.
Finally, there is a case for a joint venture, an interesting option for Allisgood plc. Its speciality compared with the other options is that a partner business is needed to set up a joint venture. This will prove to be to an extent a difficult consideration, as the nature of the partner business must be carefully taken into account. Because Allisgood plc is a conglomerate, it does not really matter if the venture partner is from a rather different kind of business sector, which in some cases can lead into further integration of the companies. The opportunity cost is, not surprisingly, management problems arising from differing views and conflicting company cultures, and the short-term nature of joint ventures.
In sum, it is not clear which of these methods is the most optimal for Allisgood plc. To further evaluate these options, considerations about location and financing of the foreign operation must be made. It is only then we can try and formulate an accurate evaluation of prospects involved with each of these strategy options. Hence, the issue of location is discussed next.
Naturally, in foreign expansion plans the most central consideration is to decide the location of expansion. There is a variety of countries with their specific competitive advantages available for a business. Interestingly, it appears that we can distinguish the feasibility of these areas and rank them in an order of preference. However, the analysis below is unlikely to be exhaustive as there are yet considerable differences between the countries in the given areas.
To begin with, expansion inside European Union (EU), but not Eastern Europe, was suggested. A great advantage of this area is that identical legal framework is in force due to standardised European Community (EC) legislation. The fact that the location is geographically close means transportation costs are likely to be lower than in other suggested locations. Additionally, due to the geographical proximity the location is relatively convenient in terms of monitoring of the process, the management will hence have better information about the state of the operation. Clearly, there are downsides to this location, main ones being expensive and highly regulated labour.
Second proposed option was expansion to Eastern European countries inside the EU. As the countries are part of the supranational organisation, same advantages arising from identical legislation can be derived here. Although, the labour productivity in the given Eastern European country has to be considered, it may be low. Limitations to the advantages of Eastern Europe can be identified, namely, labour is available elsewhere at lower cost. Additionally, Eastern Europe is struggling with corruption problems In spite of these limitations the EU countries of Eastern Europe seem to be a convenient location to expand for Allisgood plc.
Therefore, South East Asia is discussed to evaluate that conclusion. A low cost and limitedly regulated labour market is a considerable benefit of this location. Clearly, South East Asia is not part of the EU and there will be costs arising from differing legislations, as well as from external trade regulations of the EU. The presence of trade regulations discourages locating into an area that is not clearly strong in other areas in order to offset this weakness. Moreover, the geographical distance poses a problem in two ways. Firstly, the transportation costs are very high and there is greater risk due to longer transportation distance. Hence difficulties might arise when contracting for transport. Secondly, it is hard to impose a firm control on the foreign operation, as the opportunity cost of the top managers of travelling from the UK to South East Asian locations would be high. It has to be agreed that these costs are persuasive to doubt the idea of expansion to South East Asia. Although, there is some evidence that setting up subsidiaries and making acquisitions are easiest to accomplish in this area.
Thus, it has been identified that the Eastern European countries in the EU would appear to be a feasible location for Allisgood plc's foreign expansion. It offers advantages - although not in their extremes - that could help pushing down the costs of production of the cost-ineffective kitchen equipment branch. Interestingly, it could help to capture a share in local markets of the area that are growing on high rates. It would be as well a rather convenient location in terms of monitoring the process. Nevertheless, one question, perhaps the most important one remains: finance.
It is crucial to find the optimal solution for provision of finance - this aspect should be carefully considered. Again, three options were offered. None of these options offer Persuasion of Allisgood plc's shareholders becomes important here, and also, the fact that there is a single major shareholder, will make his persuasion even more crucial as he can greatly affect to the acceptance and rejection of the plans. Therefore, we investigate the feasibility of each financing option.
A suggested financial solution for Allisgood plc foreign expansion is issuing of new shares. This is a feasible way of raising capital in terms of the company's financial structure. It is usually considered that high amount of equity in comparison with high debt is better. The burden of risk remains entirely on Allisgood plc shareholders. This means that promotional costs are incurred, and the task of promotion might prove difficult as the recent performance of Allisgood plc has been declining. Finally, as Allisgood plc is the smallest company by market capitalisation (low number of shares or low share price) on London Stock Exchange,
Another solution offered for consideration was raising debt capital to finance the expansion. For the reasons stated above, this option is not feasible in terms of the capital structure of the company. There is a need to contract with the bank about securities to the loan, which will again require extra efforts and result in costs incurred by the lawyers of Allisgood plc. The major advantage of raising debt capital is that the cash will be available in a relatively short time and hence the expansion planning does not need to provide for delays that occur when cash is raised by issuing of new shares. Therefore, this might be a feasible financial solution for Allisgood plc.
A solution to be deeply considered is equity swap, which appears to be a feasible option. It offers opportunities of special kind to Allisgood plc, but again, it requires finding a suitable partner. In this option some Allisgood plc's stocks are swapped with the shareholders of the company subject to acquisition in foreign expansion. Therefore, it cannot be used as financing solution to set up a new business abroad, but only in case of an acquisition. In this option, risk is dispersed among the shareholders of both companies, there seems to be some evidence that Allisgood plc's shareholders might be left better off than the other company's as the stock trend will usually be negative for the shares of the initiator of the acquisition. It seems that this option could be feasible, but small market capitalisation of Allisgood plc is likely to negative the benefits stated above.
In conclusion, all of financial options have downsides to them. Debt capital as a financial solution might be the most logical, because Allisgood plc has low market capitalisation affecting negatively the other two options. Again, anything more conclusive in this regard is rather speculative to state without further financial information about Allisgood plc.
Of the options offered for consideration, it can be concluded that there are a number of feasible combinations available, each of them subject to certain limitations. However, there seems to be some evidence - at least by intuition - that acquisition of an established company from the EU countries of Eastern Europe, financed by debt capital would offer some advantages compared with other solutions for Allisgood plc. Nevertheless, limitations to this solution have been identified and it cannot be definitively argued for. Foreign expansion is often a good way of pushing down the costs of production. But given the limited set of options here, it has not been considered whether some other options would be better for Allisgood plc. Whatever the final solution will be, it seems that Allisgood plc is heading to a future of opportunities. Although ultimately, each of these opportunities require thorough investigation that ought to be conducted with great care due to the risks involved.