Maternal effect genes are genes expressed during oogenesis in order to produce mRNAs or proteins required for early development. These genes play a vital role in producing asymmetrical divisions, cell-cell interactions and determining cell fates in the early embryo. Such genes include the Maternal effect genes are involved in the early specification of cell fates, for example Early cell-cell signalling requires the The maternal effect genes encode a variety of different proteins which together initiate complex patterns of differentiation required for
 Cell divisions occur at the same time, in the same place in each organism, so that each cell, at each stage of development will always assume the same fate. This allows the same patterns of development to be studied in numerous individuals. The early lineages that shall be discussed in this essay can be seen in figure 1.
 Fertilization triggers several important events, including the completion of meiosis in the oocyte arrested in prophase of meiosis I, and the production of a protective chitin eggshell, which gives the embryo an oval shape. However, the spindle becomes displaced towards the posterior pole resulting in an asymmetrical division, that gives rise to the larger anterior AB blastomere, and smaller P This asymmetric division is vital in the development of the Early developmental patterning involves both asymmetric divisions and cell-cell interactions in order to correctly determine cell fates, and this not only occurs in
This essay shall consider maternal effect genes, which are those genes expressed during oogenesis in order to produce mRNAs or proteins required for early development. These genes play a vital role in producing asymmetrical divisions, cell-cell interactions and determining cell fates in the early embryo. Maternal effect genes are commonly studied by looking at the development of an embryo from a mother carrying a mutation in one such gene. These mutations are known as 'maternal effect mutations,' and in this essay these embryos shall be termed 'mutant embryos,' although it is the mother who actually carries the mutation.
The They are maternal effect genes, whose role is to provide polarity information during the first cell cycle in order for the correct asymmetrical localisation of cell fate determinants.
As the oocyte enters the spermathecum, the sperm storage organ, the pronucleus moves away from the pole of entry, and the sperm fertilises the egg at the opposite pole. As well as triggering completion of meiosis and eggshell production, sperm entry specifies the A-P axis.
The entry point of the sperm and the associated centrosome it brings to the oocyte, determines the posterior pole. This causes a deep invagination of the membrane, called a pseudocleavage furrow. However, the spindle becomes displaced towards the posterior pole, and this requires the PAR proteins.
Following sperm entry, PAR-1 and PAR-2 localise to the posterior cortex, and
PAR-3 and PAR-6 localise to the anterior cortex. PAR-4 and PAR-5 are enriched in the cortex, but are not polarised. The sperm's ability to affect PAR distribution has been found to be dependant upon an intact actin cytoskeleton, as when this is disrupted with cytochalasin D, the first division is no longer asymmetric. Oppositely PAR-2 is no longer restricted to the posterior in Cuenca During establishment it is proposed that signalling events occur between the sperm asters and the actin cytoskeleton to displace the PAR-3/PAR-6/PKC-3 complex to the anterior cortex, which allows PAR-2 to accumulate in the posterior cortex. The maintenance phase then involves PAR-2 preventing the PAR-3/PAR-6/PKC-3 complex returning to the posterior domain.
The displacement of the first mitotic spindle requires a greater pulling force at the posterior aster than the anterior. It has been found that in In In each case, the result is that the spindle remains central. LET-99 is a protein that requires the In It has therefore been suggested that cortical forces on microtubules are lowest where LET-99 is highest, allowing the stronger posterior forces to displace the spindle.
The PAR proteins are vital in displacement of the first mitotic division spindle, and are also required for the asymmetrical localisation of cell fate determinants into P
The EMS blastomere at the four-cell stage of development, as seen in figure 3, produces pharyngeal and intestinal cells in the wild-type embryo. Bowerman Normal sperm could not rescue embryos whose mothers were homozygous mutants, therefore it is the maternal expression of the gene that is required, so The role of the
Immunofluorescence spectroscopy shows that Through laser ablation, where a laser microbeam was used to destroy all but the EMS blastomere, it was determined that the EMS blastomere produced hypodermal and body wall muscle cells in This therefore shows that
The  SKN-1 however lacks a leucine zipper required for the dimerisation which permits DNA binding in bZIP transcription factors. Evidence suggests that
SKN-1 has an alternative DNA binding domain termed the 'SKN domain,' and that it binds to DNA as a monomer. Figure 4, shows that SKN-1 localises to the nucleus, further supporting the idea of SKN-1 being involved in the regulation of embryonic transcription. Since EMS cell fates appear to be specified autonomously,
Staining for the SKN-1 protein shows there is an unequal distribution of SKN-1 from the 2-cell stage, as seen in figure 4. P The levels in AB could be assumed to be too low to induce pharyngeal cell fates. When P
It has been found that mutations in the maternal effect gene It therefore appears that MEX-1 activity is required for the restriction of SKN-1 activity to P In This indicates PAR-1's more general role in the distribution of cell fate determinants. However in both This suggests that PIE-1 is required to restrict A simple diagram demonstrating these conclusions is represented in figure 5.
We have seen that P  The PIE-1 protein is first detectable at low levels in the posterior cytoplasm of P The asymmetrical distribution is achieved by PIE-1 accumulating equally at each centrosome of a dividing germline blastomere, but following rotation of the mitotic spindle levels decrease rapidly at one of the centrosomes, so that only the germline daughter cell contains PIE-1 at its centrosome.
The
PIE-1, which contains two zinc-finger motifs. ZF1 of PIE-1 (as well as MEX-1, POS-1 and MEX-5) interacts with a protein that forms part of a ubiquitin ligase, which targets proteins for degradation in a proteasome.
Through monitoring the transcription of a chromosomally integrated transgene it has been found that embryonically transcribed RNAs can be detected in somatic blastomeres from the 3-cell stage, but are not detected in the germline blastomeres.
The role of PIE-1 in the cytoplasm has been suggested as ensuring efficient expression of NOS-2.  Its mRNA is degraded in somatic blastomeres, while being maintained in germline blastomeres, and it is involved in ensuring the primordial germ cells associate with the somatic gonad. PIE-1 is also implicated in functioning to promote NOS-2 protein expression.
As discussed in section 3, In these mutants, all the anterior blastomeres adopt an altered cell fate, and the only change to the posterior blastomeres is failure to produce germ cells, as P blastomeres differentiate into muscle cells. Cloning of the
The maternal effect gene Figure 7 shows the localisation of both
The expression of the Indeed it has been found that the 3' UTR of the found that the 3' UTR contained a 125 nucleotide region required to repress translation from the 2- to 4-cell stage, and a 61 nucleotide region required for repression of translation in the P The spatial control of GLP-1 expression has been shown to be dependant upon two other maternal effect genes, A model for this mechanism of control can be seen in figure 8.
At the beginning of the 4-cell stage, ABa and ABp are equipotent, demonstrated by the fact that the blastomeres can be swapped in position to assume the opposite cell fates. It has been shown that P This signalling is dependant upon
As we have seen GLP-1, the receptor, is localised at the membranes as in figure 7.
In a 4-cell stage embryo the mRNA of This confirms that P The asymmetric APX-1 distribution, despite equal mRNA distribution like GLP-1 implies regulation perhaps by translation control, or protein stability. POS-1 seems to be involved in its regulation of expression.
As previously discussed EMS contains determinants for autonomous development of pharyngeal and intestinal cell fates. Some ABa descendants also have a pharyngeal cell fate, however these fates do not develop autonomously, but require cell-cell signalling. It is found that pharyngeal induction does not occur if MS is destroyed, indicating that this is the signalling cell. Two ABa descendants contact MS, and the signalling event occurs to induce pharyngeal cell fates in these descendants. As in the 4-cell interaction, GLP-1 is the receptor, however in this case APX-1 does not appear to be the ligand, as it is not found in the 12-cell stage signalling cell MS. It is the stage of development that the ABa descendants are at, and the consequent factors present at this time, that produce the required outcome.
In conclusion, maternal effect genes play vital roles in determining the early development of the  This is evident from the detrimental effects in the development of an embryo whose mother if mutant in a maternal effect gene. Proteins and mRNAs from maternal effect genes, such as the Localised determinants such as those from the