Centromeres are essential to the accurate segregation of chromosomes during division. They are the site of cohesion of the sister chromatids and kinetochore formation for spindle attachment. Heterochromatin is a defining feature in the organisation of centromeric chromatin, and 
I satellite DNA is also notably present. The centromeric nucleosomes have been found to contain a histone H3 replacement, CENP-A. This appears to be the foundation protein in the recruitment of other centromere-specific proteins that form the inner kinetochore. These proteins have an effect over the organisation of centromeric chromatin, and it is has been proposed that a spiral is formed, with CENP-A nucleosomes present on the poleward face, along with the associated kinetochore proteins. Many features of the organisation of centromeric chromatin however, remain unclear.
The centromere is the site found in every eukaryotic chromosome, which attaches to the division spindle during pro-metaphase. This is mediated by the kinetochore, a multi-protein structure that captures and helps to transport chromosomes.1 The centromere holds the two sister chromatids together until anaphase, and is essential for the correct segregation of the chromosomes during mitotic and meiotic cell divisions.,, Errors in this process causes aneuploidy, and may have a considerable impact on the cell's survival, as well as the organism as a whole.4 The importance of centromeres becomes most evident when considering such errors in human conditions such as Down's syndrome, with trisomy of chromosome 21, and Patau syndrome, a trisomy of chromosome 13. Centromeres allow accurate transmission of a cell's genetic content,5 and their function is conserved throughout all mammals, and through eukaryotes as a whole.
When considering the organisation of centromeric chromatin, it is important to consider the formation of the kinetochore, the site of attachment of spindle microtubules, mitotic checkpoint signalling and the generation of molecular force to drive the movements of the chromosome.4 It consists of the inner kinetochore, which is composed of the centromeric chromatin and associated foundation proteins that remain throughout the cell cycle, and the outer kinetochore, which assembles after the condensation of whole chromosomes, and disassembles after the chromosomes have segregated.6 There have been six foundation kinetochore proteins identified in mammals. CENP-A, hMis12, CENP-C, CENP-H and CENP-I localise to a core domain of centromeric chromatin.4 CENP-B, is non-essential, and involved in heterochromatin formation.4 These proteins assemble co-dependently, and create structural domains for the function of the centromere.4 Histones H2A, H2B and H4 are also technically foundation kinetochore proteins, however they are not centromere specific. CENP-A, CENP-B and CENP-C associate directly with the centromeric DNA.,, CENP-H, CENP-I and hMis12 are more recently discovered proteins.4 Whilst CENP-B is non-essential, the remaining proteins are found at all active centromeres, as well as neocentromeres, but not at inactive centromeres. Their deletion results in chromosomal missegregation.4
The organisation of the centromeric chromatin is therefore highly dependant upon the foundation kinetochore proteins. Another important aspect to consider is the cohesion of sister chromatids. This cohesion last until anaphase, when the sister chromatids separate and move toward the poles. Cohesion is mediated by the chromosomal complex cohesin, and proteolysis destroys it when it is no longer required. One distinguishing feature of a centromere is the presence of heterochromatin, and it is thought that it is responsible for the recruitment of cohesin.6
Centromeric chromatin is thought to be organised into domains that are responsible for increased chromosome scaffold/matrix attachment, sister chromatid cohesion, transcriptional silencing, hypoacetylation and differential DNA replication timing.2 There are several distinguishing features of the organisation of centromeric chromatin such as the presence of -satellite DNA, heterochromatin, CENP-A nucleosomes, and other centromeric specific proteins that will be discussed here.
There is an absence of any conserved sequences within centromeres across species, despite centromeres fulfilling a universal role.2,6 This is also surprising since the kinetochore proteins assemble directly on to the DNA, which may be expected to rely on sequence specificity.4 However, centromeric DNA does follow conserved organisational themes, such as the presence of repetitive DNA.4 Long stretches of short tandem repetitive, or satellite DNA sequences, are commonly found in the centromeric and pericentric chromatin.6 It has been found that human centromeres consist of -satellite DNA, most notably -I satellite DNA, a tandemly repeated sequence with a ~171bp repeat unit. 
-I satellite DNA is enriched with a run of 17bp within this sequence is partially conserved in primates and mice, with the consensus CT(T/A)(C/T)G(T/G)TGGAAA(C/A)GG(G/A)A. This sequence relates to the CENP-B box, proposed for binding the CENP-B protein.3 This CENP-B box motif is found enriched in a subfamily of -satellite DNA in humans.4 Although the CENP-B box is not well preserved throughout all mammals, the CENP-B protein itself is.
The presence of tandem arrays of satellite DNA is an organisational theme, but the subunits are simply not conserved.4 Satellite sequences can display large differences, even between closely related species.6 The number of repeats and their association with other sequences differs from one chromosome to another, even between the human chromosomes. Many chromosomes have their own specific centromeric DNA repeats, for example chromosome 7 contains long arrays of  satellite, while chromosome 21 contains 2 long arrays of  satellite flanked by other satellite sequences, and chromosome Y, contains  satellite flanked either side by other satellite sequences and new repeats not found in any other chromosomes.
The determination of kinetochore formation, a key feature of centromeres, therefore appears to not be sequence dependant. Size of the centromere domain, also seems to have little relevance to centromeric function.2 There is a large variation in the range of centromeric size across all eukaryotes.3 The length of human centromeres alone vary from 200kb to over 4Mb.4 It is suggested that it is a higher-order structure of the chromatin that defines a centromere. For example, the secondary or tertiary structures formed through association with protein.
Centromeric chromatin has a higher order chromatin structure that is significantly different from the rest of chromatin and it is this that is proposed to mark the site at which a kinetochore is formed. There is observable conservation of this chromatin organisation, rather than DNA sequences. Centromeres contain a form of chromatin called heterochromatin, which is heavily staining, condensed, transcriptionally inactive and late replicating. It may be further defined as constitutive heterochromatin, due to its presence throughout the entire cell cycle.
Heterochromatin has several defining structural features. It is associated with a conserved protein, HP1.2 HP1 has been found to localise to pericentric heterochromatin, and is involved in the structural formation of heterochromatin.2 The amino terminals of the core histones in heterochromatin may be modified by acetylation, methylation, phosphorylation and ubiquitination and ADP-ribosylation at specific amino acid residues. Pericentromeric heterochromatin, for example is specifically marked by the tri-methylation of histone H3 lysine nine and mono-methylation of histone H3 lysine 27.4,
 It is proposed that these modifications and their effects on nucleosome structure, may serve as recognition motifs for other proteins.13
The heterochromatic structure of centromeres is essential for the correct segregation of chromosomes during division. This has become clear as depleting heterochromatin components results in missegregation.4 The heterochromatin appears to recruit cohesin to the centromere, for the cohesion of sister chromatids.
Nucleosomes are the fundamental repeating unit of structure for chromatin folding. Histones H2A, H2B, H3 and H4 form a core octomer, which binds strongly to the DNA independent of nucleotide sequence. Centromeric nucleosomes however, contain a specialised centromeric histone H3, and in humans this protein is CENP-A. This protein replaces histone H3 in the octomer to package DNA into nucleosomes.6 It is believed that this difference serves to identify the centromere for the protein components of the kinetochore and sister chromatid cohesion proteins.3,11,
 This is supported by studies, which show that when CENP-A is disrupted, the kinetochore proteins are mislocalised. It has been suggested that it is the late replication of centromeric chromatin that leads to CENP-A incorporation, however there are other late replicating regions present within the chromosome that do not incorporate CENP-A.12 The significance of the discovery of CENP-A was to emphasise the suggestion that centromeric chromatin is unique because of its higher order structure, in this case more specifically its histone complement, rather than because of its primary DNA sequence.6 There is also evidence that suggests that CENP-A and histone H4 form sub-nucleosomal tetramers that are more compact and conformationally rigid than the equivalent H3-H4 tetramers. This feature of centromeric nucleosomes may also play a role in maintaining centromere identity. Since the organisation of centromeric chromatin must be so that it can withstand the strength of the pull of microtubules, it has been suggested that the
CENP-A nucleosomes can with stand this force while the H3 variety cannot.6
There is much evidence to demonstrate the replacement of H3 for CENP-A in centromeric nucleosomes. Immunoprecipitation techniques have shown a significant depletion of histone H3 in the region where CENP-A is observed to bind maximally. Nucleosomes have also been reconstituted using CENP-A and the regular nucleosomal histones H2A, H2B and H4, and through the use of atomic force spectroscopy, 'beads on a string' images have been observed, similar to those obtained when using the four standard histones. Although the exact centromeric nucleosomal structure may not be clear, the interaction of CENP-A with H2A, H2B and H4 is evident. It also remains unclear as to whether CENP-A replaces all centromeric H3.
Histone-mediated nucleosome construction allows the formation of 30nm chromatin fibres that can be compacted into further higher order chromosomal structures. This normally involves interactions with non-histone proteins to form loops from a central protein scaffold. The -satellite DNA in centromeres however, is packaged closer to this scaffold.2 Both the centromeric and pericentric domains have been found to have enhanced scaffold/matrix attachment.4,
 The proteins involved here may perhaps also provide a function in kinetochore assembly.
Over 25 centromeric proteins have been identified, and these proteins are highly conserved in mammals. They have various roles in centromere assembly and modification, cohesion and separation, microtubule attachment, chromosome movement and checkpoint control.2 Most of the evidence suggests that there is a specific order to the recruitment and assembly of these kinetochore proteins.
CENP-A, is the replacement of histone H3, which is involved in the nucleosomes core as discussed above. It has been found that some regions of CENP-A and H3 are homologous, as may be expected from proteins that partially fulfil the same role. The non-homologous regions are presumed to be involved in centromere specific interactions. This protein binds directly to the DNA, and it appears that it is the foundation protein and recruits the other proteins, as they fail to localise correctly without it.6
There is a suggestion that centromere assembly and CENP-A synthesis are independent of each other. CENP-A can deposit in the absence of the replication process, however, it is synthesised much later.2 Models have been proposed in which CENP-A may be acquired in order to complete centromere assembly, or that histone H3 may temporarily be deposited before a CENP-A specific centromere assembly factor fills in the vacant nucleosomal sites or replaces H3 with CENP-A.2 Since the over production of CENP-A results in its inclusion in euchromatin, and it is proposed that the opposite replacement mechanism may exist in the euchromatin to maintain H3 nucleosomes.6 The exact mechanisms involved here are still to be determined.
CENP-B binds to a specific centromeric DNA sequence, the CENP-B box, which occurs as discussed previously. It promotes nucleosome positioning, however it is not absolutely required for centromere functioning. Its localisation is independent of CENP-A, and it is absent in centromeres without CENP-B boxes, so its role in the organisation of centromeric chromatin may therefore be questionable. It is thought however, that it may be involved in the formation of heterochromatin, rather than in centromeres themselves, and it is only because centromeres contain heterochromatin that it is present.4
CENP-C is found only at active centromeres, and disruption of this gene is lethal, with failure of the chromosomes to segregate. Like CENP-A and CENP-B this protein has been found to bind directly to the DNA, and in this case it is not sequence specific.6 CENP-C requires CENP-A to localise correctly, but CENP-A does not require CENP-C, suggesting that the kinetochore assembly involves the recruitment of CENP-C by CENP-A containing chromatin.23
CENP-D is GTP binding protein and is involved in chromosome condensation from a prophase chromosome to metaphase chromosome. CENP-E is kinesin like, and is responsible for chromosome movement and segregation. CENP-I is a protein that is not required for CENP-A localization.4 CENP-H is another protein not required for CENP-A localization.4 hMis12 is another centromeric protein found in humans, and homologues have been detected in other mammals.4 This protein localizes to the centromere independently of CENP-A. It does not affect CENP-A localization, but its depletion leads to the loss of CENP-I and CENP-H, as well as missegregation.4
Neocentromeres provide important information towards the organisation of centromeric chromatin. These are found in humans. Neocentromeres are 'ectopic' centromeres that occur at normally non-centromeric euchromatic chromatin.2 These neocentromeres may be transmitted through mitosis and meiosis in humans. There has been ~70 different human neocentromeres identified.6 These are regions that contain no  satellite DNA. However they are able to fulfil the role of a centromere and assemble a functional kinetochore. This again suggests a chromatin-based identification of centromeres, and no sequence specificity. When looking at the sequence organisation of neocentromeres, it has been recognised that it is AT rich, with a high density of LINEs, few SINEs and few genes.19 Not only do neocentromeres rule out the requirement of satellite DNA for centromeric function, but also the requirement for constitutive heterochromatin.6 Neocentromeres do however bind CENP-A, the centromeric replacement for histone H3. It appears therefore that CENP-A is a key feature of centromere identity.
It appears that the centromeric chromatin has a domain structure, where a centromeric core is flanked by pericentric heterochromatin. It is in the core centromeric chromatin in which histone H3 is replaced by CENP-A, and it is consequently the site at which the kinetochore is located. The pericentric chromatin is associated with the formation of heterochromatin.4 The pericentric heterochromatin is proposed to provide a physical barrier between centromeres and the euchromatic chromosome arms. It may also have a role in suppressing meiotic recombination.4 The existence of these domains is supported by the fact that the chromatin immediately flanking the CENP-A chromatin, replicates at a different time to other
non-CENP-A chromatin.11
Antibody staining, indirect immunofluorescence and deconvolution have begun to help build a picture the organization of centromeric chromatin. For example it has been observed that CENP-A and CENP-C co-localise on a metaphase chromosome, and that the CENP-A domain forms a cylindrical structure that covers the depth of the chromosome. The CENP-A domain is found parallel to the axis of the chromosome.4 These proteins are localized at the inner plate of the metaphase kinetochore, and are present throughout the cell cycle. The 3D imaging of these proteins can be seen in figure 1.
CENP-E has been found to only partially overlap, and lie external to CENP-C.11 CENP-H, CENP-I and Mis12 positioning is yet to be determined, however there is evidence to suggest that they co-localise approximately with CENP-A and CENP-C.,, Over 95% of
CENP-B has been found to be localized throughout centromeric heterochromatin, beneath the kinetochore. This correlates well with the dependence of CENP-B on the presence of the CENP-B box in the -satellite DNA as previously discussed.
It appears that the centromere consists of interspersed blocks of CENP-A and H3 containing nucleosomes, which each form sub-domains.11 Two proposed arrangements of these domains can be seen in figure 2. When considering the linear arrangement of the centromeric chromatin, this would equate to a discontinuous arrangement of CENP-A nucleosomes. Since the CENP-B and CENP-C proteins bind DNA, they would also be implicated in a linear domain structure. Since CENP-C co-localises with CENP-A, it is proposed that it would therefore also occupy discontinuous domains. CENP-B however, binds to CENP-B boxes and does not co-localise with CENP-A so may be found distributed across the CENP-A and the intervening H3 domains.4 The spiral and loop models in figure 2, orientate the CENP-A nucleosomes to be outward facing, and the H3 nucleosomes to be inward facing, thus presenting the centromeric specific nucleosomes outward, for kinetochore assembly.11 This order would act to distinguish it from the rest of the chromatin.
It has been found that the size of a CENP-A region in this model, may vary widely.11 In humans these regions may extend from 500-1500kb in human centromeres.11 CENP-A antibodies have been show to stain one-half, to two-thirds of the -satellite DNA at human centromeres.11 Therefore not all -satellite DNA is involved in kinetochore assembly. As of yet it is not known what the exact proportions of CENP-A and H3 are, and if their number varies from block to block.
There is evidence that suggests that the heterochromatic state of the CENP-A domain is diluted or absent.4 Histone modifications that normally occur in heterochromatin, such as methylation and hypoacetylation, cannot occur to CENP-A as in H3. The lack of heterochromatin is also suggested since centromeric chromatin has dimethylated lysine 9 H3, shown to bind less HP1 than trimethylated lysine 9 H3 of pericentric heterochromatin.4 Gene transcription has also been demonstrated. It would appear therefore that the CENP-A domains are euchromatic, however there is conflicting evidence as to weather the intervening H3 domains are hetero- or euchromatic. However it has been proposed that some level of heterochromatin may be required for the cohesion domain.4 Other evidence appears to show that it may exist in a euchromatic state.4 The state of H3 chromatin therefore needs to be examined further.
Combining the available data and 3D observations, has resulted in the proposal of a 3D model of the organization of centromeric chromatin as seen in figure 3. In this proposal the centromeric chromatin coils, with increased scaffold attachment. The CENP-A nucleosomes align to become outward facing for interaction with the other foundation kinetochore proteins completing the kinetochore. The H3 domains are inward facing, and may serve a role in cohesion, combined with the flanking heterochromatin.
The organisation of centromeric chromatin in mammals is complex, and yet to be fully understood. There are many distinguishing features of centromeric chromatin including 
satellite DNA, heterochromatin, CENP-A nucleosomes, and other centromeric proteins which all contribute towards centromere structure. Their orientation in the organisation of centromeric chromatin is in most cases has still not been determined. However, data has gradually been provided to enable the formation of models such as that seen in figure 3, and with time perhaps such models can be adapted or confirmed.