Since the emergence and characterisation of In recent years the incidence of Legionnaires' disease has increased. This essay aims to understand the characteristics of
 This organism has complex nutritional requirements, including an unusually high iron and cysteine requirement, low levels of sodium and aromatic compounds (3). Unlike other waterborne pathogens (which are often transmitted through drinking or recreational water or from person to person), the spread of
It wasn't until 1976 when an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease struck an American Legion convention killing 29 people, that It is now recognised that
In addition to the generation of Legionnaires' disease, Unlike the symptoms exhibited by Legionnaires' disease (fever, disorientation, lethargy and lung damage), symptoms of Pontiacs Fever are less severe and include fever, chills and headaches. To date evidence of Pontiacs Fever has only been noted during Legionnaires' outbreaks and in comparison to Legionnaires' disease there have been no recorded mortalities from this form of the infection.
The spread of Until the development of water reservoirs (e.g. cooling towers) and evaporative condensers of air conditioning systems, However, in recent years the number of Legionnaires' outbreaks has increased, the majority occurring during the summer months when use of air conditioning is generally greater.
By examining the processes occurring within such water storage and distribution systems we can gain an increased understanding of why more and more outbreaks are being recorded. Firstly, as with any surface, biofilms form within water storage systems. A microbial biofilm consists of bacterial colonies attached to each other and their surface by the secretion of adhesive polysaccharides. In adverse environments, i.e. nutritionally deficient conditions, biofilms trap essential nutrients (for example iron), providing a rich environment for bacterial growth. As the number of large-scale water storage and distribution systems has increased, more buildings now contain reservoirs of In practice, these reservoirs cause an increased threat to humans due to inadequate cleaning and water treatment standards which don't remove the organisms before they have chance to replicate and spread to potential hosts.
A second factor affecting the increase of Legionnaires' outbreaks is the presence of amoebae in aquatic systems. This organism feeds on microorganisms present in biofilms and hence may ingest Of the thirteen species of amoebae, only two support the replication of These two species are Within the amoebae, These facts can be shown by a study using water samples obtained from five hospitals in Paris. Of the samples taken, 71% contained amoebae and 47% showed presence of When these water samples were incubated, bacterial replication occurred, providing the sample contained amoebae (1).
In addition to protecting There are numerous similarities between the life cycles of The effects of such research is summarised in figure 1:
This research therefore indicates that the strategies evolved by
In addition to the research shown in figure 1, there are other virulence factors of Examples of such factors are summarised in figure 2.
The increased ability of This value of 71% is significant as when the same conditions were applied to bacteria cultured in broth, more than 99.9% killing was observed (12, reviewed in 1). This therefore clearly shows that replication in amoebae increases the virulence of
In general, when a host organism becomes infected, it is the job of both the innate and humoral immune responses to clear that infection.  Even with the presence of specific antibodies there is little increase of monocytic bactericidal activity. Horwitzal. (13, reviewed in 1) demonstrated this by incubating serum- resistant encapsulated It was observed that the number of colony forming units (CFUs) decreased by 2.5 logs. Another similar treatment reduced These data therefore indicate that complement, specific antibodies and polymorphonuclear cells cannot resolve infection and therefore partly account for the ability of
Due to the inability of innate and humoral immune responses to clear However, as
Horwitzal. (15, reviewed in 1) studied the role of the cell-mediated response in non-susceptible hosts. The activity of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from recovered individuals in comparison to age and sex matched controls. The findings of this research are summarised in figure 3 and show that clearly a specific T-cell response has occurred in the recovered patients.
In addition to the data described on the previous page, the supernatants of samples of patient cells exposed to This therefore supports the idea of a cell-mediated immune response.
There are many stages to the cell-mediated response, however as previously discussed these are only feasible in non-compromised host cells. A critical activator is interferon- Bhardwaj et al (16, reviewed in 1) demonstrated that IFN- The ability of IFN- This therefore indicates that the pool of iron in activated macrophages may limit the growth of Because of the ability of activated macrophages in non-susceptible hosts to terminate infections by
Although the role of the host immune system is to protect and rid the body of foreign organisms, in the case of
As described in the previous section, components of complement (e.g. C3 and specific antibodies) opsonize the bacterium in an attempt to remove it from the body (13, reviewed in 1). However, upon failure of complement-mediated killing, receptors on the surface of macrophages recognise the opsonins and allow a special whirling phagocytosis event to occur, characteristic of In the absence of opsonization, the Mip protein (macrophages invasion protein) found on the This Mip protein is only synthesised in response to low levels of amino acids and the consequent presence of uncharged transfer RNAs (tRNAs), which activates Rel A causing the accumulation of guanosine 3'5' bispyrophosphate synthetases (ppGpp). This accumulation results in entry into the stationary phase of replication and the expression of virulence traits that promote transmission e.g. the Mip protein. This example therefore illustrates how the growth phase of
Once inside the macrophage, vesicles containing The main virulence system employed As part of the type IV secretion system these two genes were originally designated due to their ability to transfer plasmid DNA to a recipient cell (21, reviewed in 1). However, immediately after phagocytosis of It is through these pores that effector proteins (which would otherwise be used to traffic the phagosome to the endosome) are then transported to the host cytoplasm (22, reviewed in 1). Royal. (23, reviewed in 1) demonstrated the importance of the Results showed that in contrast to wild type cells,
Examples of proteins lost from the phagosome during membrane remodelling include the lysosomal marker LAMP-1 as identified by fluorescence microscopic assays (25, reviewed in 1). The loss of this guanosine triphosphate (GTP) binding protein from the membrane prohibits the promotion of fusion between early and late endosomal compartments (26 reviewed in 1). Unpublished observations also indicate that the loss of transferrin receptors from the phagosomal membrane stops virulent
Whilst the Horwitzal. (24) used kinetic studies to show that such vesicles budded from the phagosome taking with them proteins that would otherwise activate the endocytic pathway. In this way the maturation of the
The evidence presented to support both By measuring the release of p-nitrophenyl from the synthetic substrate p-nitrophenylphosphorylcholine (29, reviewed in 1) the activity of phospholipases has also been identified as interacting with the phagosome membrane and hence preventing phagolysosome formation. Two other molecules are also known to disrupt phagolysosome formation. These are the lectin, concanavalin A, and ammonium chloride. Although neither of these two molecules have been linked to pathogenesis, the lectin can cross-link membrane glycoproteins forming vacuoles that can't fuse with lysosomes (29, reviewed in 1), whilst ammonium chloride raises vacuolar pH hence interfering with phagolysosome formation (30, reviewed in 1).
As previously described, the dot/icm type IV secretion system is one of the primary mechanisms by which ingested Research has shown that this same set of genes is also involved in the recruitment of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and the formation of a replication vacuole. (31, reviewed in 32).
Within one hour after the isolated phagosome is established, numerous mitochondria are recruited to its side and approximately four hours after isolation the cytoplasmic face interacts with the host cell ER, hence establishing the site of replication (24, reviewed in 1). After fusing with the ER, Once these important transformations have occurred the It is then within the nutrient-rich environment of the lysosome that the Without the ability to replicate so profusely at the expense of the host macrophage, infection by
As the available nutrient levels gradually decline, the The mechanisms by which this response occurs is shown in figure 4:
When amino acids are limiting uncharged tRNAs activate RelA, a guanosine 3'5'- bispyrophosphate synthetases. Accumulation of ppGpp coordinates entry into the stationary phase with expression of virulence traits that promote transmission to a new host. Some effectors may be substrates for type II and IV secretion systems whilst others such as flagellin (essential in providing motility for finding a new host), the development of osmotic resistance (essential for surviving in the natural environment) and the secretion of cytotoxins (promotes escape from the spent host by lysis) are more easily categorised.
The most obvious way to prevent further incidence of Legionnaires' disease would be to eradicate As previously discussed this would be an extremely difficult in practice due to the resistance of bacteria within amoebae and biofilms to biocides. Other method such as UV radiation and heating to 60
Therefore the majority of recent research has been focused on the development of biocides for water treatment that have no detrimental effects on humans, but kill In addition, research has also focused on the development of a vaccine that would involve the activation of macrophages and recruitment of cytotoxic T cells to help kill the bacterium-infected macrophages (3).
However, at this point in time no such advances have been made and therefore the main method used to prevent outbreaks of Legionnaires' disease remains the cleaning and maintenance of water systems such that microbial life is limited or prevented. Regular chemical and microbial testing of potential
The increased incidence of Legionnaires' disease in recent years is primarily due to the increased need to store water in large quantities and the development and increased usage of aerosolizing technology for example whirlpools, showers and air conditioning systems. With inadequate cleaning and the stringent water treatment policies implemented by many countries, many pathogens are not removed from such water systems and instead find themselves in the perfect niche for colonisation and transmission.
Within the natural environment, The colonisation of this organism has enabled This is due to the resistance and protection conferred by the amoebae during water treatment processes and other adverse environmental conditions. In addition, the colonisation of amoebae has also led to the evolution of specific virulence factors essential for infection, survival and replication within human alveolar macrophages such that when a susceptible host inhales a
A greater understanding of the virulence factors and the characteristics of