The sense of humour and humour expression exist in every culture. Individuals who have greater sense of humour are usually thought to have better interaction with others and have better mental health. A high association between sense of humour and better psychosocial adjustment has been found in cancer patients (Dowling J, 2003). Also, research indicated that positive humour style was positively associated with social competence (Yip J, 2005). However, there is little research that focus on the role of humour and its relationship with intercultural adjustment.
Studying and staying abroad can be regarded as a life transition. International students encounter stressful life changes and intercultural adjustments (Leong &amp; Mallinckrodt, 1992). Many international students reported that they experience less social contact due to their language insufficiency; nevertheless, the majority of international students still fulfilled their academic goal and completed the study successfully. They also reported that they have grown to become more independent and more confident after the life transition. The positive characteristics that affect the adaptation to a foreign culture and the development of new social relationship are my research interest. The purpose of this study is to understand the meanings and uses of humor while international students are studying abroad in the U.K. International students are defined as non- U.K. students, first time coming to the U.K for pursuing degree. The study will utilize a nonexperimental design to achieve the desired aims described below. First, to understand how international students use humour and humour styles. Second, to gain insight and understanding of how they establish social support and its relation with humour styles. Third, to know how they use humour to enhance their intercultural adjustment. Fourth, to explore possible links between their intercultural adjustment and their objective sense of well being.
A non-experimental design will be utilized, and correlational research method will be used to study the relationships between attribute variables such as humour and adjustment. The most important reason to choose correlational research is that the relationships between humour and intercultural adjustment are like an interactive network. In other words, they are mutually-causal relationships. It is more efficient to use correlational method to explore the possible, underlying linkage. Another reason to use correlational method is that my research is happening in everyday life rather than in a laboratory. The intercultural adjustment refers to the difficulties international students would experience everyday in a foreign culture. For example, expressing their thoughts in a foreign language. Correlational method is also useful when I use optimism and humour as the predictor variables to predict the condition of adjustment. On the other hand, an experimental design is not suitable in this study because it is difficult to generalize the result to day-to-day settings. Indeed, individual adjustment is such a complex phenomenon that it cannot be tested in experiments. Moreover, the relationship between individual differences and their adjustments is not linear; consequently, it is not suitable to infer causal relationship by an experimental design.
As I mentioned in the introduction, I chose the non-experimental design to carry out this study for reasons below:
First, the natural of the variables that I want to study is not observable. For example, intercultural adaptation is an abstract issue. What is a 'good adaptation'? How do we observe an individual's adaptation condition from his or her behaviour is really a difficult issue.
Second, the intervention in my study, which should be controlled in an experimental design, is the natural setting itself. When we discuss the intercultural adjustment of people from different corners of the earth living in a new environment, we encounter the difficulty to 'create' the same intervention as a different culture.
Third, we can expect the relationships between variables will be very complicated. It is nearly impossible to obtain a one-way causal inference to interpret the relation. Therefore I rather choose a non-experimental design to investigate the phenomenon.
Fourth, the Pretest-Posttest Design can establish a wider scope of interpretation. We can examine how humour and social adaptation change over time and see if people with sense of humor have better social support and better adaptation after three months.
How about using a quasi-experimental design, namely, nonequivalent control group design in this study? The nonequivalent control group design has the advantage of providing a comparison group. Comparison group also improves controlling for changes that may be due to time or other causes. In this study, it is impossible to use the design because we cannot find a comparison group that does not face different culture and ask them to complete the measure of their intercultural adjustment. However, to enhance the external validity, we could have two groups that include adults moving to other country for working and younger adults entering new schools to see their humour style and the relation to adjustment.
There are several limitations to the proposed study. First, the personal characteristics of the subjects may be limited to a specific set due to the recruitment procedure. It is also possible that maladapted students do not have time or desire to take part in the study, which may bias my findings. Besides, the research environment may be lack of control because subjects are assessed through the Internet.
Second, the first data will be collected at the beginning of term two, which is later than the beginning of academic year, lead to incorrect baseline value. Therefore the participants' basic mental status and their adaptation condition are unknown. It could have some confounding factors that would influence the results. Also, some maladapted students will not be included in the research because they could have discontinued schooling.
Finally, the HSQ has seven response options, which may be confusing for some participants. Social desirability response bias must also be considered.
Despite these limitations and potential problems from this study, this preliminary research has vast potential and great innovation in humour study within the positive psychology field.