Within eukaryotic cells the DNA is not sited in the nucleus on its own, inside the nucleus the DNA is associated with various proteins and RNA forming a complex structure called chromatin. The total length of pure DNA that composes a chromosome is much greater than the actual measured length of a chromosome found in mitotic cells. This means the DNA must be condensed and pack to convert it from a long narrow structure to a dense thick rod, it is the chromatin proteins that cause this DNA packing. The structure of chromatin varies across species and across individual chromosomes; this essay aims to address the organisation centromeric chromatin in mammals.
The proteins associated with DNA in the nucleus are all positively charged and can be divided into two simple groups: histone and non-histone protein. Histones are essential for the structural packing of DNA and carry a large positive charge. This is achieved by the high percentage of lysine and arginine residues present and allows the protein to bond electrostatically to negatively charged phosphate groups located on the DNA backbone. X-ray diffraction studies show that chromatin produces regularly spaced diffraction rings suggesting a repeating structure of histone-DNA complexes; this diffraction pattern dissipates when the histones are removed. There are five main variations of the histone protein.
The histones H2A and H2B pair up to form the tetramer (H2A) (H2B) (H4) These two tetramers then join up to form an octamer structure called the nucleosome. The nucleosome is in the form of a flattened disk measuring 6nm by 11nm, this shape is deigned to be the structural basis for the coiling of DNA (figure 1). A total of 146 base pairs of DNA can be warped around each nucleosome in a 1.75 left-handed superhelical resolution (Krude The function of histone H1 is as a spacer molecule that binds to the linker DNA between the lengths of DNA that are wrapped around the histones octamer. Figure 2 shows an electron micrograph of this first level of DNA condensation. If this structure is treated with micrococcal nuclease only the linker regions of DNA are available to be cleaved because the nucleosomes protect the DNA that is coiled round them.
When the salt conditions are high the nucleosome bead structure (figure 2) assumes a coiled form called a solenoid. This structure is 30nm in diameter and is stabilized by the H1 histone which runs down its centre (figure 3).
There is still a third level of packing required to form the mitotic chromosome. The 30nm solenoid forms a series of looped domains that condenses the DNA further into a 300nm wide fibre. The fibre is then coiled into the chromosome arms that constitute a chromatid.
Fine detail structure studies have shown that the histone protein is not all tightly structured; several of the proteins possess tails which can act as sites for histone modification. H3 and H2B have tails that protrude through the minor grove channels of the DNA helix; H4 has a tail that forms a connection with adjacent histone molecules. The first of the modification and most common is acetylation by the enzyme acetyltransferase (HAT). This enzyme adds an acetyl group to lysine residues which neutralises its positive chare therefore altering the net charge of the protein. This action appears to open up the chromatin fibre and possibly altering gene expression. Methylation can occur to both lysine and arginine residues and phosphorylation of serine and histidine residues, both are thought to alter gene expression and the levels of phosphorylation seem to characterise different stages of the cell cycle.
The chromatin structure is not uniformed over the entire chromosome, observation during interphase show that some areas of chromatin remain condensed while others uncoil. It is these uncoiled regions that's possess the transcriptionaly active parts of the genome (protein coding regions) and has been given the term euchromatin. There is another form of chromatin that remains condensed during interphase, this is heterochromatin. It is located at the telomeres and in the centromeres and shows little or no transcription regions. This type of chromatin is believed to play a mechanical role in chromosome structure and to aid the segregation of the chromosomes during cell division.
Centromeres are highly complex chromosomal substructures involved in essential aspects of chromosome transmission during cell division. The centromere/kinetochore complex is responsible for directing chromosome movements in mitosis and for progression of mitotic events at the transition between metaphase and anaphase. For accurate chromosome segregation interactions must occur between the centromere/kinetochore complex and the spindle apparatus. In most organisms the centromere appears as a constitutively functioning structure that exists at a defined position of a monocentric chromosome. In some eukaryotic organisms (not mammals) centromere activities are distributed throughout the entire length of the chromosome forming a holocentric structure (Choo
During cell division centromeric DNA attaches to spindle microtubules through a proteinaceous structure, this is the kinetochore. The outer region of the kinetochore assembles when the chromosome condenses to allow the microtubules to attach, and will dissociate again after chromosome segregation. The inner kinetochore is present in the DNA at all points of the cell cycle and is formed by special centromeric chromatin and associated foundation proteins (Henikoft Despite the conserved function of centromeres across species they lack any conserved DNA sequence, but most centromeres do show a particular similarity. That is that they comprise of long stretches of short tandem repeats called "satellite DNA sequences" that are only found in the centromere and the surrounding pericentric heterochromatin. In humans this repeat is knows as Although this sequence is found in all normal human centromeres it is not the deciding factor of centromere location. In stable 'dicentric' chromosomes where due to rearrangement, a chromosome contains two centromeres, the centromeric function is often lost from one of the two
The second piece of evidence to support the theory that DNA sequence is not determining factor for centromere location is the presence of neocentromeres. These are ectopic centromeres that originate from normal noncentromeric regions of a chromosome and therefore do not contain the A neocentromere shows an ability to function like a true centromere, and there have been a small number of documented cases to prove it. A Neocentromere may take on the role of a centromere when the true centromere has been removed from the chromosome. This is possible due to rearrangement and breakage of the chromosome, leaving a dicentric chromosome and a centromere devoid chromosome. However due to a lack of Epigenetic factors must play a role.
Thirdly the presence of heterochromatin does not define the centromere, it is known that heterochromatin is present around the centromere but it is also found at chromosome telomeres. If heterochromatin is the deciding factor in centromere development then telomeres would demonstrate some of there activity. This confirmed that merely the presence of heterochromatin does not create a centromere.
This evidence shows that the location and function of the centromere is dependant upon more than just a DNA sequence and general chromatin type, the molecules that comprise the centromeres chromatin must give the centromere its function. Centromeric chromatin must be different on a molecular level to that of normal chromatin.
Centromere location is determined by a collection of at least six kinetochore foundation proteins that assemble in a hierarchical and co-dependant fashion. The kinetochore is a densely staining fibrillar region with the centromere, to which spindle microtubules attach during meiosis or mitosis. The kinetochore proteins bind to both the DNA and the heterochromatin that is located either side of the core centromere region. In humans the kinetochore assembles on the These six proteins are CENP-A, CENP-B, CENP-C, CENP-H, CENP-I and the most recent addition hMis12. The first three are thought to associate with centromeric DNA therefore directly forming the centromere chromatin (Politi The These six proteins (excluding CENP-B) are essential for centromere activity and are also found at neocentromeres. This demonstrates that this chromatin protein is more of a deciding factor for centromere location then DNA sequence.
CENP-A a 17kDa protein is present in humans and similar homologues exist in mice and in all other eukaryotic organisms studied (Sullivan The protein contains a histone folding domain at the C-terminus that is 62% identical to H3 C-terminal and with a variable N-terminus. Loss of the protein in mice leads to the mis-localisation of some kinetochore proteins and over expression causes no functional kinetochore to be produced (Amor It is now widely accepted that CENP-A replaces histone 3 within chromatin nucleosomes.
A study by Blower
The number of CENP-A spots varies greatly across human chromosomes which suggest that CENP-A containing regions or the amount CENP-A nucleosomes varies widely. When Blower
CENP-A synthesis appears to be linked to centromere replication during mid-S phase to early G When the protein is expressed under the H3 promoter it does not associate to the centromere suggesting that CENP-A is involved in the packaging of centromeric chromatin and that it may provide an early epigenetic marker for centromere formation (Fowler
CENP-B is an 80kDa protein that will bind to the centromere independently of other proteins. This is because it is the only protein with its own specific DNA binding domain, a 17 base pair sequence knows as the CENP-B box. This box is found only in The role of CENP-B is still under debate due to it nonessential nature as is it not found in mammalian Y chromosomes, in human neocentromeres and CENP-B knock out mice show normal viability and normal kinetochore formation (Amor
CENP-C is a 140kDa protein which is totally dependant on other proteins for its localisation. This protein will bind directly to DNA but with no sequence specificity, in humans for successful localisation the protein CENP-A must be present. CENP-C also appears to network with CENP-B an interaction shown by the yeast two-hybrid experiment of Suzuki The loss of the CENP-C protein in knock out mice causes lethality at 3.5 day from post conception (Amor These interactions suggest that the CENP-A, B and C protein together form the identifying features of centromeric chromatin.
The hMis2 protein is found in humans and yeasts and homologues of it can be located in most other mammals. The protein localises to the centromere independently of CENP-A and is present through out the entire cell cycle. Removal of hMis2 from a cell leads to miss segregation of the chromosome during cell division and the loss of CENP-H and I (Amor
Very little is known about these proteins, one confirmed observation is that neither is required for CENP-A localisation. CENP-H does however co-localise with CENP-A, C and with CENP-I for the whole cell cycle.
Heterochromatin is a specialised highly condensed for a chromatin that is associated with tandem DNA repeats. It is found only in specialised chromosome locations such as flanking the centromere or at either telomeres. It forms silent stretches of DNA where not transcription takes place. The heterochromatic state is not determined only by the DNA sequence but by epigenetic factors such as histone modification. There are three modifications, first the N-terminus tails of the H3 histone are methylated two or three times at the lysine-9 residue. Second the deposition of HP1, a heterochromatin associated protein, due to the methylation of these lysine residues. And third is cytosine methylation of the DNA itself (Derijck
Due to the continuous presence of heterochromatin at pericentric regions in all eukaryotic chromosomes it would appear that it is required for centromere function. In an article by Ahmad The mechanism for these processes is not stated nor is the reason why centromeric proteins do not localise to all regions of heterochromatin, such as telomeres. One possible reason for the presence of heterochromatin is to provide a suitable, stable environment for the assembly of centromeric components, such as the CENP-A containing nucleosomes.
The basic centromeric organisation in mammals comprises of a kinetochore and its associated proteins along with a heterochromatin domain. In the human centromere there are a set of well defined domains the fibrous corona, the outer and inner kinetochore plates and the inter kinetochore plate spaces. Finally the area underlying the inner kinetochore plate is thought to consist of a heterochromatin region.
In a paper by Amor
The organisation of centromeric chromatin is significantly different and unusual to that of the rest of the chromosome. Difficulties in studying this structure have arisen because the chromatin changes during the cell cycle and the exact mechanisms as to how have not yet been identified. A further problem for study is the variability of centromeric chromatin across different species, the largest advances have occurred in the study of budding and fission yeasts but these organisms show certain centromeric differences to that of mammals.
From all the data gathered it is clear that the DNA sequence at centromeres is not the determining factor for centromere location although it clearly plays some role in centromeric protein recruitment. It seem fairly certain that epigenetic factors contribute significantly to the formation of centromeres, the most noteworthy of these is the discovery of CENP-A histone H3-like protein. This molecule creates centromeric chromatin that is structurally different to euchromatin and heterochromatin, and aids the recruitment of other key centromeric proteins such as CENP-C.
Further studies into the production and recruitment of CENP-A and the other proteins utilised in the centromere should provide further insight into centromeric organisation.