Genetic recombination is a process that occurs in all organisms but has been studied in detail in bacteria due to the relative easy of genetic experiments that can be conducted. Genetic recombination can be either homologous, where the region of DNA combining are reality similar in sequence, or non-homologous where these regions are significantly different. This article aims to define and explain the method of homologous recombination in bacteria and explain a method of non-homologous recombination. These two topics will be covered in molecular detail and their methods compared in a final review.
Homologous recombination is signified by DNA crossovers in regions with the same or very similar deoxynucleotide sequences. This means that in most organisms recombination takes place between sites on the DNA molecules that have the same orientation with respect to the entire DNA molecule. For the two DNA molecules to recombine there mush be a significant proportion of complementary base pairing to allow for synapse formation, however for this to occur any double stranded DNA must unwind to reveal the bases. Specialised enzymes are required to promote this unwinding and to allow for the breaking and rejoining of the DNA molecule with its corresponding strand. A heteroduplex is formed in the regions of complementary base pairing in two DNA strands but this process often involves all the strands of the DNA molecules recombining.
Numerous models have been proposed to explain the mechanisms of recombination at a molecular level which have been briefly outlined here.
Escherichia coli is one of the most intensively studied organisms by man, for this reason a great deal is known about its mechanisms of genetic recombination. The following molecular mechanism will be describing these processes found in E.coli.
In E.coli it is thought that over 25 different proteins are involved in the recombination process and of these several have already been assigned specific roles (see table 1).
In E.coli branch migration and resolution of the Holliday junction can be preformed by three Ruv proteins A, B, and C which are encoded for on adjacent genes. The RuvA subunit consists of three domains (I, II, and III) which forms a fourfold symmetric tetramer (Rafferty et al 1996). Detailed analysis showed that domains I and II were responsibly for Holliday junction binding where as domain III plays a regulatory role in ATP dependant branch migration through the contact of RuvB (Nishino et al 1998). Within the RuvA tetramer each DNA arm is recognised on the minor grove side by two helix-hairpin motifs inside domain II. At the binding site interface hydrogen bonds between phosphate oxygens of DNA domains and atoms from the major protein chains along with water mediated hydrogen bonds from the interactions that hold the DNA in place. The central acidic pin of the RuvA tetramer is formed from Glu55 and Asp56 residues from each subunit and repels the DNA backbone away from the junction centre by electrostatic repulsion (Yamada et al 2004).
The function of RuvA is to force the Holliday junction into certain structures which are suitable for branch migration and resolution. The RuvA-DNA interactions are thought to be suited to rotation arms sliding of the DNA arms over the RuvA protein. The Holliday junction lies in a planar conformation and within the middle of the RuvA tetramer there is a region of DNA that is not base paired, forming a square of single-stranded DNA (figure 7).
The RuvB proteins than form a hexameric ring structure encircling one arm of the DNA (figure 8). The two oppositely orientated RuvB structures using ATP driven motors pull both DNA duplex arms causing the Holliday junction to migrate. The ATP is not required directly for migration because the number of bonds broken and reformed is always equal so no input of energy is required. However spontaneous migration is slow, so the ATP is required to quicken the reaction and give it directionality.
Once the Holliday junction has migrated it can be resolved (cut) by the protein RuvC. This is a specialised endonuclease from a family of proteins called X-philes and will cut the DNA at two consecutive thymine residues. The RuvC protein can only cleave the DNA then it is bound to RuvA and B, so is specific to the process of homologous recombination (Yamada et al 2004). The protein is made from two identical polypeptides encoded for by ruvC, this formation produces two active sites each of which can cut a single strand of DNA, and so in the homodimer conformation it will cause a double-stranded break in the DNA. Two sets of double-stranded DNA have now been formed which now possess recombinant sections of DNA.
The two methods of genetic recombination covered in this article both occur using a similar physical technique of a four stranded Holliday type junction forming and of two synapse duplex recombination sites. Both processes are enzyme dependant; the phage  reaction will not take place without the intergrase enzyme being present and the homologous recombination reaction requires RecBCD, RecA and various other protein molecules. Both recombination events show some branch migration of the DNA, in homologous recombination this branch migration can be of infinite distance but in the phage  integration this migration only continues for 7 base pairs of DNA. Homologous recombination can physically occur in any part of the bacterial DNA strand, the only requirement is the presence of DNA with a significant region of homology to it. The phage  integration however is site specific and can only occur between the gene coding for biotin production and galactose metabolism because it is between theses two sites that the attachment sires attB is found. A further difference between the two is the ability of the phage  DNA integration reaction to be reversed, allowing the phage DNA to be excised again specifically which allows the virus to move from a lysogenic state into a lytic phase. The reversal of the genetic recombination reaction doesn't occur during homologous recombination.
There are several other methods of genetic recombination n bacteria including transposon integration along with several other bacteriophage integration method, for it is often the case that different lysogenic bacteriophage have varying methods of chromosome integration.