Methods by which Current research has highlighted several possible factors that influence disease outcome, such as adhesion factors and secreted proteins found on the bacterium. Since the discovery that This article aims to outline the molecular biology of the organism in its survival mechanisms, its major role in causing gastric ulcers and the modern treatment of them.
The genus  The bacterium is only found in the mucus layer of the human stomach lining, the gastric epithelium cells. After thousands of years of co-evolution between the bacterium and humans a complex relationship between the two has developed leading to chronic infections allowing both the bacteria and host to survive. The World Health Organisation in a recent report stated that about half the world's population is infected with Infection with
The method of transmission is still relatively unclear for this bacterium but two pathways have recently been suggested: faecal-oral and oral-oral. Several studies from developing countries also show that environmental factors maybe important, such as drinking water management and sewage treatment.
Different transmission routes are likely to be predominant in different geographical areas, for example countries with well developed sanitation will show more oral-oral transmission then faecal-oral. The oral-oral transmission pathway was proposed because Through this method of transmission the mother is believed to play a major role in transmission of the infection to her children during infancy.
In developing countries a study by Klein Those families that had external water supplies were three times more likely to be infected with Also discovered was that children from high income families that had a municipal water supply had a twelve fold increase risk of being infected that those families with a water supply from community wells.
Doubts have been cast however to the faecal-oral transmission method, studies among sewage workers (Friis Levels of IgG antibodies against
 The pathogen posses polar flagella, and with its corkscrew shape will easily borrow into the gastric mucosa which protects it from the acidic environment of the stomach. A mucus-hydrolysing enzyme also aids the bacterium on entering the mucus layer. The The enzyme requires nickel as a cofactor and it was found that in acidic conditions the enzyme relocates from the inner to the outer section of the bacterial cytoplasm where, it assembles urea channels called The urea is imported by a proton-gated mechanism through the Nickel homeostasis is required to maintain urease activity and is achieved by the Overall the urease action produces an alkaline cloud around the bacterium, neutralising the acid and protecting the cell.
Adherence to epithelium cells is a requirement for successful colonisation of the stomach. A bacterium with better adherence to epithelium cells is likely to be more resistant to clearance by the immune system and therefore a more successful pathogen. Close contact with epithelium cell surfaces will prevent the pathogen being removed during mucosal shedding and give it a supply of nutrients acquired from the damaged epithelium cells. However this close contact does have disadvantages, it puts the pathogen into such close contact that it will cause a large immune response that will be difficult to escape due to the pathogens reduced motility. There are several proteins currently believed to be important in host cell adhesion these include: BabA, SabA, SabB, HopZ and OipA. BabA (b-binding adhesin) is the best characterised A possible secondary role of the Lewis antigen for However in vitro studies have produced different hypothesis, a study by Rothenbacter Of the women studied the People of the Le (a-b+) phenotype possess Le B in their bodily secretions such as saliva and gastric fluids, these antigens may bind to the glycoproteins on the This mechanism was also used to explain the common observation that none secretors (such as blood group O subjects) are at increased risk of This study highlighted the importance of both the strain of
The putative adhesin SabB encoded for by the gene The SabB adhesin is a homologue of the sialyl-Lewis They help mediate the movement of leukocytes cells to the site of infection or inflammation. These glycoproteins are almost never present in healthy living tissue yet are found abundantly in inflamed tissue (like during a In mimicking inflammation glycoproteins the SabB adhesin may play a role in ulcer formation, by increasing the amount of cell damage caused by high levels of inflammation. The exact function of the adhesin for H.pylori is still unknown.
When the pathogen infects it stimulates both branches of the immune system into a response.
Innate immunity:
The body initiates a strong inflammation reaction producing a number of cytokines typified by high concentration of interleukin-8 (IL-8) produced by gastric epithelium cells. This cytokine is chemotactic and encourages neutrophils to the site of infection contributing to the inflammation cascade. Macrophages are activated and release other interleukins such as IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, and IL12 along with interferon- The innate immune response is not sufficient to clear the infection and increase inflammation.
Adaptive immunity:
 These antibodies can activate circulating T helper 1 cells; the vigorous immune response does not eliminate the infection.
It is extremely rare that the infection is cleared naturally by the immune system once clinical signs of disease have been presented.
There are several identified virulence factors produced by
 It will act as a chemotactic for neutrophils and monocytes and will promote adhesion of neutrophils to the epithelium cell membrane. It will also induce mast cells to produce proinflammatory cytokines. Also by inducing neutrophils to release oxygen radicals its roles as a gastric ulcer former is strengthened, as these oxygen radicals will react and damage epithelium cells.
 Its model was confirmed by Fischer Once inside the host cells the toxin can cause rearrangement in the organisation of endosomes and lysosomes, vacuole formation and membrane fusion and swelling. The vacuole produced can be used to facilitate intracellular survival of It is also believed that VacA can down regulate the T cell response; VacA will bind to T cells and inhibit its nuclear factor (NF-AT) of the activated T cell. When Vac A is present NF-AT fails to translocate to the T cell nucleus inducing the down regulation of IL-2 transcription. This occurs in conjunction with VacA induced signalling to p38 stress kinase in neutrophils and T cells, this suggests that VacA plays a major role in causing gastric inflammation and by hampering the immune response allow for a persistent infection.
 The CagA protein is coded for in the CagA pathogenicity island, this is a cluster of genes encoding for CagA and a number of associated proteins which is about 40kb long and has 30 open reading frames. CagA has a highly diverse amino acid sequence and contains both tyrosine phosphorylation motifs and cyclic adenosine 3', 5'-monophosphate dependant phosphorylation motifs. The CagA protein will become tyrosine phosphorlated at different sites and can induce changes in the tyrosine phosphorylation of eukaryotic proteins.
This CagA phosphorylation is achieved by members of the Src-kinase enzyme family. This process will down regulate a phosphatase called SHP-2 which can lead to abnormal cell growth and possible promote gastric cancer. The CagA protein is delivered to host gastric cells by a type IV secretion system that protrudes from the cell envelope to the outside (see figure 2). The method of assembling this structure was first revealed by Rhode The needle is covered with a protein from Hp0527 which forms a VirB10-homologous protein sheet. This protein sheet is mechanically stable and is believed to protect the needle against the acidic environment of the stomach and due to its lack of antigenic variability may protect it against the host immune system. The structure may also be the primary binding structure for the type IV secretion system by binding it to a cellular receptor. The Hp0527 contains an unusually large amount of direct DNA repeats allowing for variable gene expression. The type IV secretion system in This secretion system allows the pathogen to "talk" to the host cells through signalling pathways translocating CagA protein product in to the gastric epithelium cells.
This molecule then has an effect on the host cell, one of these is to initiate actin polymerisation which alters the motility of the gastric epithelium cells so stabilising the link between the It also enables an attachment pedestal to be pushed out by the epithelium cell allowing the It is also believed that CagA causes disruption of the epithelial barrier function and dysplastic alterations in the epithelium cell morphology. The actin polymerisation will ruffle structures in the epithelium cell; this process is totally dependant on the type IV secretion system and had no bearing on the expression of the CagA protein. Membrane ruffling, cell spreading and motility are the early consequences of the infection on epithelium cells. At a molecular level a change occurs when the Rho-GTPase Rac1 and Cdc42 are activated, later in the infection the CagA protein enhances motility and epithelium cell elongation.
 It has been suggested that CagA protein may exert a growth factor like effect within the target epithelium cells. The epithelium cell derived matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-7 is found in large quantities in tumour formations and is induced during bacterial cell contact, suggesting a link between the metalloproteinase and cancer. Cag positive strains of In a study by Bebb
Once it was proven that gastric ulcers were cause by bacterial infections, various antimicrobial agents were studied for their efficiency at eradicating Single drug treatments were abandoned early due to the high levels of resistance in the bacterial community particularly to nitroimidazoles and macrolides which are key elements in multi drug treatment. In 1990 dual combination therapies containing a proton pump inhibitor (PPI) and an antibiotic, either amoxicillin or clarithromycin were introduced; this treatment however was soon abolished due to low eradication rate of just 60%. Bismuth based triple combination therapies were used as a replacement containing colloidal bismuth subcitrate, tetracycline and metronidazole. This combination is popular because it is cheep to produce, consists of a two week course of treatment and has high eradication rates. This treatment however is not adequate world wide due to a high (80%-90%) metronidazole resistance in The proton pump inhibitors have a synergistic effect with several antibiotics by raising the pH levels making it optimal for antibiotic activity. PPI based triple therapies are now considered the first line of treatment; they consist of a 7-14 day course with lansoprazole, omeprazole or pantoprazole with two of the following agents: viz. clarithromycin, amoxicillin and metronidazole.
According to an Iranian study (Malekadeh et al, 2004) 37.5% of
A new group of triple regiments have been developed containing ranitidine bismuth citrate (RBC), that are designed to replace the PPI therapies, theses cause less acid suppression but provide a bactericidal action against
If a 100% eradication of This treatment allows for high and consistent eradication rates after just a week of treatment.
A recent study highlighted the possible use of chicken egg in immunisation and treatment of The paper by Suzuki In the study IgY prepared form hen egg yolks that had been immunised with The treatment course lasted 4 weeks and after that time the C - urea breath test results were significantly lower, showing a reduction in infection, but no cases had completely cleared the infection. This antibody if administered from early childhood, possibly through diet, might be effective at preventing intestinal infection. The antibody has the effect of preventing the bacterium from adhering to the epithelium cell wall. It was estimated that one egg yolk of a vaccinated chicken contains 141mg/egg of IgY antibody and approximately 40g annually making this a cheap source of antibody for immunisation. The antibodies resistance to acidic conditions and pepsin degradation is yet to be confirmed, it was reported that inactivated of the antibody occurred at pH3 due to a major conformational change in its structure lowing the antigen binding affinity. To help counteract this problem a proton pump inhibitor was administered with the anti-Hp IgY. The mechanisms to how this IgY works are still unknown but the study's results indicate that, along with an anti-acid agent the antibody will inhibit
Now that the role There are still large areas of the bacterium's biology we don't understand, such as it method of transmission, but modern advances in biology are greatly helping researched to take great leaps forward in solving some