Studies of the vertebrate limb are usually carried out in the mouse or the chick. Chicken eggs are cheap, readily available and easily incubated. Mouse embryos need to be implanted into a mother to develop into full adults but, the large and robust chick embryos are accessible during all developmental stages when most of the important developmental decisions are being taken. This allows for a large variety of methodologies to be used to analyze the genetic regulation of many different developmental processes, such as surgical manipulation and tissue grafting.
The mouse makes a good genetic model because it is possible to create genetic knock-outs, removing the function of a gene by both forward and reverse genetics. Like with the chick the entire genomic sequence is known and the organism is easy to maintain and reproduced quickly. The disadvantage of using mice is that it is impossible to observe a developing embryo since it is buried deep within the mother's uterus, making it difficult to manipulate the mouse physically by tissue manipulation or the implantation of coated beads.
The vertebrate limb consists of an asymmetrical distribution of parts, falling along three main axes all controlled by there own signalling centre.
Three elements of the limb exist along the PD axis, the most proximal element is the stylopod followed by the zeugopod and finally the most distal element the autopod (figure 1).
Within the chick the first sign of limb formation is the thickening of the lateral plate mesoderm which eventually develops into limb buds that extend outwards producing differentiated cells that form the limb. This region of thickening is called the apical ectodermal ridge (AER); behind the ridge is the progression zone containing undifferentiated cells that will form the skeletal elements (figure 2). Posterior and proximal to the progression zone is the zone of polarising activity (ZPA) which is the primary source of signalling molecules that form the patterns along the AP axis (Niswander
Components of an FGF signalling cascade initiate the limb bud formation in vertebrates and cause the formation of the AER. FGF10 is the first FGF to be detected and is found in the mesenchyme of the limb forming region where it induces the production of FGF8 in the overlying ectoderm (Tickle and Munsterberg 2001). These two FGF's function to in a regulatory loop which induces the formation of and helps to maintains the AER. In the chick it has been shown that FGF10 is initially expressed across the segmental plate (SP), intermediate mesoderm (IM) and the lateral plate mesoderm (LPM), but soon becomes restricted to the LPM. This restriction is partly due to the expression of other FGF factors such as FGF8, FGF4 and FGF2 which are produced in the somites and IM (Kawakami The restricted FGF10 protein signals to the surface ectoderm causing it to express FGF8, these ectoderm cells will form the AER and signal back to the IM via FGF8 to maintain the expression of FGF10, therefore completing the regulatory loop (Kawakami In FGF10 deficient mice embryos the limb bud does form but no out growth takes place, analysis by Sekine
The FGF loop is regulated by 3 molecular mediators in the form of FGF10 restriction is not only created via other FGF's but also by two WNT proteins expressed in the intermediate mesoderm (Takeuchi The action of these
Wnt2b was added exogenously to flank LPM by Kawakami
The initiation and regulation of expression of Tbx4 is found only in the hindlimb bud where as Tbx5 is found expressed in the forelimb (figure 4). Tbx5 was first detected in prospective forelimb mesenchyme (Rallis When Tbx5 is places onto the developing hindlimb it causes the production of wing like digits, when Tbx4 transcripts are placed on to the wing it causes the production of toe like digits and showing that these factors must play some role in limb specification (Rodrigues-Esteban Rallis A similar phenotype was observed in
The D-V patterning in vertebrate limbs is controlled by the protein Lmx1b, a homeodomain transcription factor expressed in the dorsal mesenchyme (Riddle Missexpression of It is induced by WNT7a a protein expressed in the dorsal ectoderm, but unlike other Wnt proteins discussed previously this one does not act via the Parr and McMahon (1995) created
Wnt7a is restricted to the dorsal ectoderm by the transcription factor Engrailed1 (En1) and Dkk1, a Wnt antagonist (figure 5) (Adamska In the absence of En1, Engrailed1 is induced in the ventral ectoderm by BMP (bone morphogenetic protein) signalling via a type 1 receptor (Bmpr1). Loss of BMP signalling leads to mice with phenotypes resembling