The initial development of These factors act in a complex and interconnected fashion providing either autonomous signals or cell to cell interaction to identify the different cell fates. This essay aims to outline the major maternal effect genes, there roles in embryo development and how there localisation is essential for the production of the correct
The C. elegans nematode has been used by development researchers for decades; over the past two, the focus has been upon genetic analysis to understand the pattern of cell fate in the embryo. The The early cells fates are determined by asymmetric divisions, localisation of regulatory molecules and cell to cell interactions. The cell to cell interactions come in two forms; first a cell or group of cells send a signal that alter the fate of an adjacent cell or, signals from one cell alter the polarisation of a second cell so it divides asymmetrically (Rose These signals are usually produced from maternally loaded mRNA (maternal effect genes), that are positioned in the egg by the mother during the production of mature oocytes. The first axis to be produced is the anterior-posterior (AP) axis at the 1-cell stage, with the sperm-derived centrosome breaking the symmetry of the oocyte. Second, the dorso-ventral (DV) axis is formed at the transition between the 2 and 4-cell stage, with EMS defining the ventral side of the embryo. Third, the left-right (LR) axis is detectable at the transition between the 4 and 6-cell stage, by two granddaughters cells of AB (ABal and ABpl) (see figure 1) which define the left side of the embryo (G
Figure 2 shows a cell lineage diagram of the C. elegans embryo demonstrating the asymmetric division of cells, most of the early embryonic patterning events occur before the 28-cell stage at which point gastrulation begins (Rose
The largest insight into the mechanisms of forming A-P cell polarity in the zygote came form the study of six maternal-effect mutants that resulted in a defective A-P polarity at the 1-cell stage.
Within the
The initial polarisation is believed to emanate from the nucleation of sperm-derived microtubules around the sperm pronucleus (Wallenfang The formation of this microtubule organising centre appears to correlate in space and time with the earliest signs of polarity.
During the nuclear migration the pronuclear-centrosomal complex rotates by 90 It is during this process that the maternally loaded PAR proteins become asymmetrically distributed.
PAR-1, a ser/thr kinase and PAR-2, a ring finger protein are localised on the posterior side of the zygote near to the entry of the sperm asters (Cuenca In a paper by Cuenca The findings showed that it is enriched in the posterior cortex centred around the centrosome and then progresses outward towards the anterior until 50% of the egg is covered (G
PAR-4 is thought to be a ser/thr kinase and is distributed equally thought the cortex along with PAR-5 a 14-3-3 protein (Lyczak The function of PAR-5 is relatively unknown but when absent PAR-6 responds weakly, or not at all to its localising signals, suggesting that PAR-5 causing protein localisation (Cuenca
PAR-3 and PAR-6 are PDZ-containing proteins that form a complex with an atypical protein kinase C (PCK-3) and localise at the anterior cortex (G As with PAR-2, Cuenca
Mutations in the From these mutant studies the order of function of the genes can be predicted. Rose The genetic pathway was reviewed by Cuenca The reverse was true in the Cuenca
Once the 1-cell polarity has been established by the PAR proteins this information needs to be translated to other maternal proteins down stream that are required for determining cell fates. This process is thought to be controlled by the proteins MEX-5 and MEX-6, these are CCCH finger proteins that act downstream of the PAR proteins by establishing maternal protein asymmetry. This protein function was suggested after observations of
The maternal effect gene Bowerman This characteristic was different from the AB cell which, when removed was unable to produce pharyngeal cells. This experiment proved that that the P
SKN-1 protein is not detectable in either the oocyte or sperm before fertilization takes place. Once the initial cleavage on P As the first cell cycle takes place the levels of SKN-1 increase in the P There is however a noticeable higher concentration in the daughters of the P
SKN-1 is a transcription factor that binds to DNA as a monomer, it acts in the EMS cell to activate transcription of zygotic gene which induce somatic fates. It has an unusual DNA binding domain called the Skn domain (see figure 5) which includes a carboxyl-terminal basic region (BR), like those of dimeric basic-leucine zipper (bZIP) proteins, and a flexible amino-terminal arm resembling helix-turn-helix proteins (Thiphaphone
The distribution and activity of SKN-1 is regulated by other maternal effect genes, primarily MEX-1, PAR-1 and PIE-1 (see figure 6).
Figure 6 shows a marked difference in the SKN-1 levels between the AB and P1 daughter cells in the wild type embryos at the 4-cell stage. However in the MEX-1 and Figure 6 shows that in PAR-1 mutants all the blastomeres appear to have very similar levels of SKN-1. The AB cells have more SKN-1 than the wild type and the P1 cells less than wild type. By the 8-cell stage SKN-1 is detectable in all blastomeres of the mutant embryos and only in P1 descendants of the wildtype embryo (Thiphaphone
Along with regulating the EMS blastomere cell fate, SKN-1 my also play a role in determining the ABa cell fate. In In a paper by Shelton
The EMS cell divides to form asymmetrical E and MS (see figure 1). This asymmetry was though to evolve autonomously but recent studies have shown that it also requires interactions between P Contact between P If the P For P
At the 2-cell stage the AB blastomere divides to form the ABa and ABp cells who, soon after formation become committed to different fates. The ABa and ABp cells are developmentally equivalent but cell-cell interactions by the maternal gene
The identities of the cells are determined at the 4 and 12-cell stages and isolated cells in cultured medium showed that both used the same GLP-1 receptor to respond to the signals (Shelton
GLP-1 is a transmembrane protein from the same family as the It is expressed on the surface of ABa and ABp cells and their descendants from the 4 to 28-cell stage (Mickey The initial difference between the two AB daughters is created by signalling from the P GLP-1 signalling has a second influence at the 12-cell stage where the MS blastomere signals to two of the ABa descendants, alp and ara (see figure 8) to form pharyngeal cells producing the left-right axis of the embryo (Mello The fates of the AB descendants can be switched by moving them to different locations within the embryo; this experimental evidence proves that the cell fates are not intrinsically determined but a result of cell-cell contact and signalling pathways (Mello
The translation of maternal This control is achieved by two maternal gene products POS-1 and SPN-4, POS-1 has a negative influence on the spatial expression of SPN-4 interacts directly with POS-1 while bound to TCR to have a positive effect on translation (see figure 9).
Mutation experiment by Ogura SPN-4 was found to contain a RNP-type RNA binding motif and is thought to bind directly to the TCR of POS-1 is present in high concentrations at the posterior of the embryo, and at very low levels in the anterior, SPN-4 is present in equal concentrations all over the embryo. SPN-4 acts to promote translation of
A second maternal effect gene required for AB lineage determination, From this data it is suspected that APX-1 acts as a ligand for GLP-1 produced by P The APX-1 ligand is required for differentiation between the ABa and ABp cells causing dorsal-ventral patterning in subsequent development (Mello
The major conclusion is that patterning in the early The PAR proteins form the initial asymmetry via cytoskeleton and spindle positioning. SKN-1 acts autonomously to form the EMS cell line, where as PIE-1 and MEX-1 work to form the germline. GLP-1 and APX-1 act with several other maternal proteins as signals to form the AB cell line and form the major body axes, but there are also several overlaps in function adding to the complexity.