Admitted to
 He was diagnosed with Down's syndrome at birth, a concomitant severe atrio-ventricular septal defect (AVSD), and patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). As a result of this, he has open access to the paediatric ward at
Referring to the presenting complaint, There are no apparent environmental precipitants. The wheeze was worse in the mornings, and accompanied by a congested nose at all times. This is the first time These symptoms have caused
There was no sweating, fever, rapid breathing, vomiting, or regurgitation. During the bouts of coughing there was no significant colour change or choking episodes. There is a family history of asthma with There is also a family history of atopy, with
 He has the typical features of the syndrome, including widely spaced eyes, low set ears, a slanted forehead and stubby fingers. His first clinical examination revealed a marked ejection systolic murmur, which lead to the echocardiogram described later and the diagnosis of Atrio-ventricular septal defect (AVSD). The AVSD was corrected surgically three weeks ago at The PDA corrected itself spontaneously before surgery.
On admission, He has no apparent allergies. He has not currently had any immunisations, as he was hospitalised the day before his appointment. He is exclusively breastfed, excepting his NG feeding whilst in hospital. Excepting the asthma and atopy described above, the family history is unremarkable.
The family have a pet dog, and neither parent smoke. Neither feels they are unduly exposed to industrial chemicals. They live in a large detached house in the rural Midlands.
 She was offered amniocentesis at nineteen weeks, but as there was a 1% risk of miscarriage with the procedure anyway, she declined. Labour was induced for possible IUGR. He was delivered at 38 weeks. Apgars were 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 minutes respectively. He was then transferred to the Special Care Baby Unit (SCBU) for 4 hours.
He opens his bowels and bladder normally.
The differential diagnosis of wheezy breathlessness in a 3/12 child with pre-existing congenital cardiac anomalies includes:
The most likely causes of baby Both diagnoses are not incompatible.
Due to the unique circumstances of paediatrics, it is perhaps best to consider the problems
Biologically, Psychologically, there is considerable worry as There is also the added recent worry of having to cope with a chronically ill family member. Socially, the family also have a 2-year old son and live in rural
 His wheeze was considerably more marked, and He was admitted and placed on 2L 28% O A repeat CXR was taken on 6/9/04 and showed no sign of cardiomegaly, but marked R U lobe consolidation.
On They stated that following surgery such as The infection itself would also take longer to clear.
A Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) screen via nasopharyngeal swab was negative. However, RSV does not exclusively cause bronchiolitis.
Rather surprisingly, there is little EBM on management and medical intervention in those suffering with Down's syndrome. However, there was some EBM on risk stratification and DS screening.
Screening for Down's syndrome with four measurements in maternal serum is increasingly common. The four markers are alpha-fetoprotein, unconjugated oestriol, human chorionic gonadotrophin and inhibin-A. Results are used by a computer programme, together with gestational age, to compute a risk of an affected child. A positive test is one in which the risk of an affected child is higher than 1 in 300 [1].
The population in the paper were 46,193 pregnancies in 14 London hospitals over five years, in which the quadruple test was applied to serum samples between 14-22 weeks of pregnancy. A test was deemed positive if the computed risk of an affected foetus was 1 in 300 or greater. The quadruple test was found to have a Sensitivity of 0.81 and a Specificity of 0.93. Just under 98% of positives recorded with this method were false positives [1].
In 1887 Landon-Down described a syndrome of mental handicap associated with various physical abnormalities and a supposed resemblance to members of the Mongol race. This unfortunately led to this condition becoming known as mongolism but the condition is now known as Down's syndrome or trisomy 21[2].
Overall Incidence of DS is 1:650, however this is strongly dependent on maternal age; a female aged between 20-29 has a 1:1000 risk, increasing to 1:100 in a 35 year old, and 1:30 in a 45 year old. Both males and female may be affected, although it is more common in males. Common clinical features include a flat face, three fontanelles, slanting eyes, epicanthic folds, Brushfield spots (white spots on the periphery of the iris) small ears (which are also low set), a simian crease, short stubby fingers, hypotonia, universal yet variable learning difficulties, with up to 50% having a congenital heart defect. There is no obvious geographical predilection to Down's Syndrome, but it is thought to be more common in Caucasians.
As discussed earlier, Down's syndrome is due to trisomy 21 (hence its alternative name). In 95%, DS occurs because of failure of meiosis resulting in one gamete having an extra copy of chromosome 21. It is this form that is associated with increasing maternal age. 2-3% of DS is due to chromosomal translocation. The remaining DS cases are due to mosaicism. In these cases, the degree of learning difficulty is dependent on the proportion of abnormal cells.
There are several associations between DS and other diseases. Up to 40% are born with congenital heart defects, the commonest being AVSD, Atrial septal defects, ventricular septal defects, patent ductus arteriosus and tetralogy of fallot are all well reported. Duodenal atresia occurs in 10%, Hirschsprung's disease in 3%. Less commonly, patients may be born with an annular pancreas, and there is an association between DS and sensinoural deafness.
Management of DS should acknowledge that the condition has a relatively high mortality in the first year of life, many individuals go on to have fulfilling adult lives. Initial management involves confirmation of diagnosis using chromosomal analysis, as if the DS was due to chromosomal translocation this has implications for future family planning. An ECG is mandatory to screen for the congenital heart defects mentioned. Tests for congenital hypothyroidism and phenylketonuria should be carried out as with other local screening programs for neonates. Later management of an individual with Down's syndrome and their family is a complex topic requiring a multidisciplinary approach. In the UK the basis of this approach is formed by a local Child Development Centre, and early referral to this is very important. Referral to relevant specialists and health care professionals can be initiated by this team [3].
Bronchiolitis is inflammation of the bronchioles, the smallest ducts that lead to an alveolus. It is the commonest cause of chest infections in children; in winter months it can be responsible for half of all paediatric hospital admissions. It is most common in those aged below 18 months (peak incidence 3-6 months), and for reasons that are currently unclear it is more common in males. It most commonly presents with coryzal symptoms, rhinorrhoea, tachypnoea, and difficulty feeding over the succeeding 2 or 3 days. In mild cases, the child improves; however, in some cases the condition progresses with increasing breathlessness, wheeze, cyanosis and pyrexia. on examination the child has rapid, laboured breathing, tachycardia, gross lung hyperinflation producing a barrel-shaped chest, prominent neck veins and downward displacement of the liver. Auscultation reveals widespread wheeze and crepitations over both lung fields. There is increased expiratory time [4].
The aetiology and pathogenesis of bronchiolitis is well understood. The respiratory syncytial virus causes Ninety percent of cases; the remainder are due to other respiratory viruses such as parainfluenza virus, influenza virus, rhinovirus and the adenoviruses [5]. Infection and subsequent inflammation leads to bronchial obstruction by oedema, mucosal debris and viral invasion. There is also air trapping, atelectasis (partial or complete lung collapse), and resultant reduced ventilation.
A differential diagnosis of bronchiolitis may include infantile asthma, congestive cardiac failure, foreign body inhalation, pertussis, or bronchopneumonia.
Management may or may not involve hospital admission. Criteria include:
Treatment is supportive. It includes isolation from non-infected infants, humidified oxygen if O Ribivarin is licensed for treatment of severe bronchiolitis, although there is little evidence to support its clinical efficacy. If O Prognosis is good, with a mortality of less than 1%, although there are now tentative links to bronchiolitis and subsequent development of asthma in atopic individuals.
NJ Waldal. Antenatal screening for Down's syndrome with the quadruple test. Lancet 2003 361: 835-836.
Kumar, P. Clark, M. Clinical Medicine, 5 W B Saunders, London.