Self-referral to A+E for bruising 2 to accident at home.
Miss  stated she was at home on the morning of 20 th Sept. this year preparing both her six-week old daughter (), and her 3-year old boy () to go shopping.  was playing with a skateboard in the hallway, and  was strapped into a pushchair. She left both children temporarily as she went to the toilet. When she returned she found  sprawled across the hallway floor, in some distress with the skateboard nearby.
was still strapped into the pushchair, which had fallen backwards onto the vinyl-covered floor of the hall. She was screaming, and had a minor graze over her right eye.  was sprawled over the floor, and the skateboard was nearby. Later,  explained that he had skateboarded along the hallway, lost balance and grabbed onto the handles of 's pushchair. The pushchair fell backwards and  fell with it, hitting her head on the floor.
Miss  said there was no loss of consciousness, and  was not bleeding from the graze. She phoned her partner's mother, who suggested she phone the Health visitor. The Health visitor was called, and recommended that  attend A+E.  arrived at A+E four hours later.
was seen by the A+E SHO, who referred  to the paediatricians.
's past medical history is unremarkable, excepting an oral Candida infection post-natally. Miss  said she had suffered from Candida infections throughout her pregnancy.  lives at home with her mother, half brother , and his father who is a paint sprayer.
She has not had all her relevant immunisations due to difficulties attending the surgery. She is not on any medications, or has any allergies.
Miss  described a normal pregnancy, and had a normal vaginal delivery at term. Neonatal period was unremarkable. Developmentally, all appropriate milestones have been achieved. Systems review was unremarkable.
Unremarkable. There was a minor graze over 's right eye that was not evident by the time of discharge.  was on the 75 th centile for weight and length, and on the 50 th centile for head circumference. Otherwise,  is a happy, active young baby making appropriate social contact with her mother, and fully interacting with the environment.
's presentation is eminently suitable for examination using a biopsychosocial approach. Biologically, there is actually very little wrong with . She is at least average compared to her peers; she has not 'fallen off' any of her centiles regarding physical progress, and appears to be a happy and contented 6-week-old girl.
However, This apparent biomedical well-being disguises the considerable psychological stressors and social depravation the family is living in. The salient points are outlined below:
After being observed on the ward,  was discharged uneventfully the same evening.
There was little evidence based care regarding Non-Accidental Injuries to infants on the internet. However, some relevant EBC on domestic violence was found:
The varied presentations of a possible non-accidental injury; the complex psychosocial arrangements affecting families in 'pockets of depravation' , family and peer pressure in bringing up children.
1. .
2.
3. .
4.