Admitted as an emergency on
Miss
A severe generalised abdominal pain, "sharp and stabbing" in nature that came on in the evening, and resulted in admission 3 hours later was described. At its worst, she gave it a severity of 10/10, and felt it was constant. It was partially relieved by the oral morphine she was already prescribed, but on admission she required a further I.V bolus. There were no aggravating factors. Miss
On the day of admission, Miss She had not observed her stool.
Miss She had recently had a decreased appetite which she described as a typical prodrome to a 'flare up' of her Crohn's Disease, but felt this was not as bad as normal. She felt she had been suffering from a temperature over the previous 4 days, but had not recorded it. She had not lost any weight recently. Before admission, she stated she felt "tired all the time" before and during her 'flare ups'. Describing these exacerbations, she said she suffers from 1-2 minor episodes/year, which are usually managed by bed rest and a low dose of steroids from her GP. She has had 2 major flare ups in the past 3 years, which both required admission.
Miss
Referring to her original diagnosis, Miss Miss
Miss Unfortunately, there were pot-operative complications including septicaemia and subsequent respiratory failure requiring ITU admission. Her left knee fused as a result of septic arthritis in the joint, and that winter she fell on ice and fractured her left hip. Miss Otherwise, she has no other medical history of note.
There is no family history of inflammatory bowel disease, and no other relevant family history.
Miss
Miss She works as a receptionist; and has had to take a considerable amount of time off. Fortunately, her employer is understanding. She is a smoker with a 6 year pack history. She does not drink.
A systems review was unremarkable.
Miss She had a right hemicolectomy in 2002 to remove a particularly ulcerated part of her bowel, and this had serious post-operative complication, resulting in further disability. She has a serious exacerbation of her Crohn's disease approximately every year.
In light of this information, this presentation of acute, severe abdominal pain which is similar in nature to previous attacks is suggestive of another symptomatic phase of Crohn's disease.
Other diagnoses that may have been considered include Ulcerative Colitis, Irritable Bowel Syndrome, Coeliac Disease and chronic infection (campylobacter/giardia).
Pale, ill young lady in considerable pain.
All other examinations were unremarkable.
Progressing steadily on ward. The dietician advised a low residue diet, which was reluctantly accepted by Miss Miss
Crohn's Disease is a chronic inflammatory disease of the gastrointestinal tract of unknown aetiology. It can affect any part of the tract from the mouth
Incidence in Europe and North America is 2-6/100 000/year. It is more common in the developed world, and in Europe is slightly more common in Northern Europe compared to Mediterranean countries. Prevalence in Japan is 10% of developed Northern Hemisphere countries. Incidence may have now peaked in far northern countries (Scotland, Sweden) [4]. It is slightly more common in females. Most patients present between the 3
Common clinical presentations include:
Ileal disease is associated with pain and obstructive symptoms, commonly due to strictures. Features of malabsorbtion, and an inflammatory mass are also common. Colonic disease is associated with rectal bleeding, perianal disease and extra-articular manifestations of Crohn's Disease. These are either related or unrelated to disease activity:
The aetiology of Crohn's Disease is incompletely understood. 15-20% of sufferers have one or more first degree relatives with the condition. Concordance with monozygotic twins is 45%; higher than that for ulcerative colitis. In an affected family, there is a remarkable degree of concordance (up to 80%) of disease type and behaviour, but offspring tend to develop the disease at a younger age than affected parents. Mutations in chromosome 6 are implicated in the disease, and also 6, 12 and 19.
Smoking increases the risk by 3-4 fold. It was thought that Poor diets (high sugar, low fibre) are more common in patients before the diagnosis of Crohn's, although changing to this diet post diagnosis has no effect on disease progression over 2 years. There is evidence that the normal mechanisms for down regulating the mucosal immune responses are impaired in sufferers.
Pathologically, 'skip lesions' are described. These are affected segments of bowel, with normal bowel in-between. Affected bowel is usually thickened due to oedema and fibrosis. The mucosa is hyperaemic and there may be aphthous ulceration; the ulcers are usually situated over lymph tissue.
Histologically, there is transmural inflammation, although it is predominantly submucosal. Lymphoid aggregates are a common feature. Non-caseating granulomata occur in 50-70% patients.
Complications:
 Large or small bowel. More common in small intestine. Initially asymptomatic, but can progress to obstructive symptoms.
 May develop between loops of bowel adjacent to bladder or vagina, and skin. Pneumaturia and recurrent UTI indicate a fistula into the bladder. Passage of flatus or faeculent discharge from the vagina indicate a vaginal fistula.
 Fissures/fistulae/abscesses. Fleshy skin tags are common.
 May complicate long-standing Crohn's Disease of the colon; the incidence may be similar to that of Ulcerative Colitis, with the exception of reduced incidence of 1 sclerosing cholangitis and bile duct carcinoma.
 May involve right ureter, leading to recurrent pyelonephritis, ureteric stenosis, and hydronephrosis.
Investigations include:
 Serum levels of K+ and albumin are often low.
 30% of those with small bowel involvement exhibit histological evidence of rectal inflammation. May show features of Crohn's Disease.
Management:
 Low-fat, lactose-free or low-residue diet is required in those with steatorrhoea, hypolactasia or stricture. Elemental diets (amino acids + glucose)are almost as effective as prednisilone in treating active disease, and can be useful in some patients. However they are largely unpalatable, and may induce relapse more quickly in some patients. Supplements of B Osteomalacia should be treated with vitamin D.
 Drug therapy is indicated in symptomatic patients
Corticosteroids. Budesonide 9mg od po is as effective as prednisolone, but with fewer side effects. Severe disease may require IV therapy (hydrocortisone 100mg qds)
Sulfasaline. 1g bd may be beneficial in active colonic disease, but not efficacious in maintaining remission.
Mesalazine. Upto 4 g od. Maintenace therapy following caecal or ileocaecal resection.
 Azathioprine 2.5mg/kg or 6-mercaptopurine 2.0mg/kg is indicated in those who continually relapse and who are dependent on low-dose steroids for remission.
 Infliximab 5mg/kg is currently the only licenced IgG chemeric antibody to TNF- Indicated in chronic acive disease resistant to corticosteroids and immunosupression. Closes 50% of fistulae. Single IV dose provent to be efficacious.
Surgery. 75-85% of Crohn's patients require at least one surgical intervention. Main indications are strictures causing obstruction and failure to respond to medical therapy. Commonest interventions are stricureplasty or resection.
Mortality is about twice that expected in age/sex matched control populations.
1. Pearson DC, May GR, Fick G, Sutherland LR. Azathioprine for maintenance of remission in Crohn's disease.  Art. No.: CD000067. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD000067.
2. Steinhart AH, Otley A. Budesonide for induction of remission in Crohn's disease.  Art. No.: CD000296. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD000296.
3. Zachos M, Tondeur M, Griffiths AM. Enteral nutritional therapy for induction of remission in Crohn's disease.  Art. No.: CD000542. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD000542.
4. Jewell, Derek P. Inflammatory Bowel Disease:Crohn's Disease.Medicine (Student Edition). Vol 31:2 (2003), The Medicine Publishing Company Ltd.