Routinely admitted on  for operation on right sided neck lump.
Mr  had first noticed a right sided, unilateral neck lump approximately 10 years ago. Whilst on a diving holiday in Mexico 5 years ago, he went scuba diving and experienced sudden and severe earache in his right ear. He added the pain was worst over the angle of his right jaw, and was very sharp. He graded the severity as 7/10, and said that despite surfacing, it lasted for several hours after. He did not feel anything else brought his earache on, and ascent to surface eventually relieved it. He tried no analgesia. He felt that there was a definite ache on his return flight home. Over the succeeding 5 years, Mr  was not concerned about it, but he recently felt it had grown and was now "quite distinct", so went to his GP who arranged an appointment with an ENT consultant.
Mr  reported no difficulty or pain on swallowing, change in appetite, weight loss, fever, dizziness, or dribbling from the angle of his mouth. He does not have a sore throat. He thought the lump did not move on swallowing. He has not experienced any loss of power in his muscles of facial expression. He is a former smoker with a 20 pack-year history, and drinks approximately 40 units a weekend.
Mr  had an operation when he was younger to insert a drain into his right lacrimal punctum after he fell and superficially scarred his face. He is hypertensive, but otherwise his medical history is unremarkable.
On admission, he was prescribed atenolol 25mg od po. He has no food or drug allergies.
Mr  works as a commercial property meter reader. He lives with his youngest daughter following the death of his wife to ovarian cancer.
A systems review was unremarkable.
The history is of a unilateral, right sided neck lump that has been slowly growing for approximately 10 years. Common or serious causes of this description of a neck lump include:
The most likely causes are emboldened.
ENT- 3X3 cm mass in right parotid area, deep below angle of mandible in anterior triangle. Mobile, non-tender, non-pulsatile and firm. Does not move with swallowing. Not tethered to underling structures. Tympanic membranes intact. Oropharynx, and nasal cavity normal. The mouth was well hydrated, and not ulcerated. Nasendoscopy showed no obvious lesion in laryngopharynx. There was no cervical lymphadenopathy, and no hepatosplenomegaly.
Fine Needle Aspiration was performed and sent for histological diagnosis.
Neurological
Cranial and peripheral nervous examination was normal.
All other systems examinations were normal.
The history and examination is of a slowly growing 3X3 cm mass deep in the in right parotid area. This makes the most likely cause of the neck lump to be:
Physically, Mr  is in good health excepting the neck lump and his weekend binge drinking of alcohol. Psychologically, he is concerned about the fears and stigma associated with cancer following the death of his wife, and is concerned about any permanent side effects of the surgery. Socially, he has had to take time off work, and may be temporarily reliant on his daughter's help for the next few days after discharge.
Mr  was seen 3/7 post-operatively, and his cranial nerve findings were:
I,II, III, IV, VI- Normal.
V- Reduced in 1 st and 2 nd divisions to discriminative touch. No parathesiae/numbness.
VII- Could not completely close right eye. Unable to blow cheeks out uniformly, and could only draw lip up to smile on left. Could only bare teeth on left side.
VIII, IX,X,XI,XII- Normal.
Mr  now has a 15 cm right sided neck scar passing from below the right pinna passing medially towards thyroid cartilage. There was no cervical lymphadenopathy. There was an evident drooping from the right side of the mouth, with associated drooling. The mouth was well hydrated and not ulcerated.
A literature search of both the Cochrane Collaboration and Evidence Based Medicine Online was unhelpful [1,2].
It appears that there is no evidenced based medicine comparing interventions in pleomorphic adenoma; excision of the tumour via parotidectomy is the intervention of choice [3]. Enucleation of the tumour is inadequate [4, 5].
Tumours of the salivary gland (SGT) are rather uncommon and represent 2-3% of head and neck neoplasms. The glands are divided into major and minor salivary glands. The major glands are:
The minor glands are dispersed throughout the upper aerodigestive submucosa (ie, palate, lip, pharynx, nasopharynx, larynx, parapharyngeal space) [3]. Accurate histopathological diagnosis is essential to effectively manage SGT. Generally, the larger glands have the most tumours, and also the highest percentage of benign tumours. Approximately 85% of SGT are pleomorhic adenomas (benign), Warthin tumours (adenolymphoma) make up a further 10% of SGTs.
History and examination of a neck lump, Common causes of neck lumps, operative complications near the facial nerve.
Personal discussion with Mr , ENT Surgeon,  Hospital.