Presented to A+E at the 
 Hospital, , on  with bilateral pedal oedema. Delusional, and therefore referred and informally admitted to the  Clinic, .
Mr  is an unemployed single 59-year old who owns his own semi-detached house in . He is an unmarried Catholic.
When asked why he was currently in hospital, Mr  said it was a "safe place for me." Mr  stated that sunlight, laser beams, ionised particles, the internet and fibre optic communication were "making (his) life difficult". He described himself as feeling like James Bond in the film 'Goldfinger' in the scene were Auric Goldfinger ties James Bond to a steel slab and proceeds to try to burn him in two with a laser. Mr  believed he had been admitted after "laser heart massage" on himself and demanded an explanation as to how this procedure worked. Mr  said his father (who died of an M.I.) saw flashing lights as he was having his heart attack, and therefore lights unduly worry him. Mr  was also worried about cars killing him, and especially concerned about the attitude of drivers in the road. There appeared to be no precipitating factors to this episode of delusions.
Mr  also described gustatory, visual and several auditory hallucinations. He said he had tasted bromine in his tea, and for this reason went to the caf over the road rather than drink the tea provided. He felt the bromine was added to decrease his sex drive. He also described intermittently seeing a "bloke with red eyes who looks like Frankie Lane", although could not elaborate any further on the significance of this.
Mr  added he heard female voices that talked to him to "remove me from dangerous situations". They gave him instructions that he couldn't remember, and said he doesn't have to do what they say, but chose to obey them anyway. The voices "looked after" him, and he considered that he worked in partnership with them. They have been with him intermittently since 1977, and the only way he can make them go away is if he smokes. He also felt that the early songs of Cliff Richard directly told him to "cheer up, enjoy myself and get married."
Mr  described thought insertion as he said "someone or something" suddenly tells him to pray and worship. This all started when he had his tonsils out and was given a "pill wrapped in strawberry jam" that christened him and intermittently controlled his thoughts. Mr  he only owned the thoughts he manages to write down on paper, otherwise "they're lost forever (to space invaders)". He stopped writing his thoughts down when it "got out of hand" but could not elaborate on this.
When asked if he thought he controlled himself, Mr  said he was. However, he elaborated on this by saying an external force was "telling me to go into the sun."
Mr 's biological symptoms include early morning wakening which has become "force of habit". He also cries when he feels he's "on an unlucky streak and has done something wrong." He also feels guilty irrationally, and feels blamed when "it's not your fault. A cloud follows me about." The major significant negatives are lack of 3 rd person auditory hallucinations, echoed thoughts, and catatonic symptoms.
Mr  first presented to psychiatric services in 1994 aged 47, complaining that he had been suffering from "his nerves", and had felt troubled for 17 years. It is unclear why Mr  presented at this time and why he had remained able to function in the community for so long. However, at that time he lived with his mother and it is felt she exerted a strong controlling influence on him. Since then, Mr  has been admitted under the care of his psychiatrist as an informal admission on 4 occasions, all for either delusions or hallucinations and has had 6 monthly OP appointments. In 1997, he had his driving licence revoked by the DVLA. His most recent admission, earlier in 2003 was because of a morbid association that when people say "goodbye" they are referring to his imminent death.
Mr  described a normal birth and early childhood, although he stated he "couldn't keep my feet" and took up athletics to increase his overall health. He described occasional period of feeling faint, but attributed this to "malnutrition".  said he "loved" school because of the pleasant teaching staff and friendly atmosphere. He did very well academically, obtaining 11 GCEs and 'A' levels in History and English. He then went to Nottingham Trent Polytechnic to read English, History and Law but dropped out after a year as he got "writer's block" in the exam. He then worked for  Council for about twelve years before he started "struggling and was pensioned off". Socially, he was a keen advocate of the Boy Scout movement but he eventually also found this too much to cope with. He has never been married, and never had children.
Mr 's current hobbies include listening to music (folk, Gilbert and Sullivan), reading (geographical, adventure stories), and films. He claims to smoke 20 cigarettes/day and has a pack history of 20 p-y. He drinks occasionally. He has never tried any street drugs.
's Mother died aged 74 in 1999. She was a housewife for most of her life, and lived with  until her death.  had a very close relationship with his mother, and cried for several months after her death. His father was a retired metallurgist who died aged 73 in 1992. He also had a good relationship with him. 's elder brother, , is a teacher in , and is now his recognised next of kin.  described him as "a fellow monk who hears his confessions". He has a younger brother, , who is in the Navy. They also get along well. There is no history of psychiatric illness.
Mr  is currently prescribed
It was not possible to ascertain if Mr  had a pre-morbid personality due to lack of insight and lack of other contributors.
Not performed on request of patient.
Mr  is still informally admitted to the  Clinic. He is a lot happier, and feels much more secure than living in the community.
Schizophrenia was first approximately described by Emil Kraepelin in 1899, and may currently be defined as "A mental disorder characterised by disintegration of the process of thought, contact with reality, and progressive loss of emotional responsiveness." It is commonly assumed that schizophrenia means 'split personality,' but the name actually refers to the splitting and disintegration of an individual's thinking and feeling processes, rather than having two personalities.
Considering the important positive and negative symptoms listed below makes the clinical diagnosis:
The prevalence of schizophrenia is moderately high, with figures ranging between 0.6-1.4%, and incidence of 11 per 100,000. Age of onset is usually between 15-30, with males presenting typically 5 years before females.
The disease is higher in Afro-Caribbean males, leading to a 'migrant' theory that schizophrenia is higher amongst individuals isolated from their original ethnic community. However, this argument is partially flawed, as levels of schizophrenia are lower amongst Asian women who have migrated.
The aetiology of schizophrenia is controversial. There are two main theories:
Presentation, diagnosis and short and long-term management of schizophrenia.