Admitted via GP on  with shortness of breath (SOB) and leg pain.
On admission, Mrs  stated she always found it had to 'catch her breath' due to her Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA), but over the 4 days preceding admission her breathlessness was becoming progressively worse since suffering from a chest infection.
Mrs  said she had a productive cough for the previous 2 days, and was expectorating several hundred millilitres of brown/green phlegm a day. She was coughing up increasing amounts of phlegm prior to admission, and there was no diurnal variation in amount. Mrs 's exercise tolerance had decreased, as she could formerly walk 'over a 100 yards' with her frame but now could only manage 'about 10 yards'.
Mrs  said she always suffered from a wheeze, but it was currently worse than normal. She was also suffering from a fever on admission, and described herself as being 'rather delirious'. She had also noticed an increasing hoarseness of voice over the preceding days, but could not elaborate further.
Mrs  is a former smoker of 30 pack-years who quit 23 years ago. She had not complained of haemoptysis, chest pain or night sweats.
Regarding her leg pain, Mrs  said it had followed a similar time course to her SOB. She indicated the pain was at its worst on her right leg about 5cm below her patella. She described it as being 'stinging' in nature, and graded the pain as being 10/10. It was aggravated by standing and weight bearing, and relieved by E45 topical cream. It had no timing associations, or was associated with anything else. Mrs  felt sure she was suffering from phlebitis as she had a similar bout 35 years ago.
Mrs 's RA was diagnosed 20 years ago and progressed from her toes proximally to eventually involve her metatarsophalangeal joints, ankles, knees, elbows, shoulders and cervical spine (c-spine). Her most recent bout involved her c-spine where she described pain, morning stiffness, and fatigue, loss of flexion/extension / lateral movements and weakness that required a cervical collar for support. At the time of the exacerbation, she had no rash, fever, constipation, ulcers or fatigue. She did not complain of neck pain or a change in sensation down her arms.
Mrs  said the changes in her hands due to RA resulted in her finding it very difficult to grip objects with either hand. This causes her difficulty in all areas of her life. Mrs  stated she could no longer hold a cup with one hand, use a chopping board to cut vegetables or prepare food, and had to put her bra on back to front as she could not reach around her back and perform the necessary movements. She has also had to give her main hobby of knitting, which was also an incidental source of income.
Mrs 's other past medical history includes:
Her prescriptions on admission were:
There was no significant family history.
Mrs  lives with her son in a semi-detached bungalow with no stairs. She has a strong family support network of her daughter, sister in law, and neighbours. She does not drink alcohol.
A systems review revealed nothing of note.
The strong, typical history of chest infection coupled with the examination findings of tachypnoea, bilateral basal crackles, and bronchial breath sounds at the right base all further support the diagnosis of chest infection
superimposed on lung fibrosis 2 to RA. The wheeze may have previously been present, or a new finding. The only unexpected finding was the patient being afebrile.
Patient became febrile during the night (T= 38c). CRP was elevated. The CXR showed reticular shadowing bilaterally. The ECG was unremarkable. Peak flow was 240 ml/s. Discharged uneventfully after 4 days.
There is a reasonable amount of recent clinical evidence on RA. The most relevant summaries are presented below.
Rheumatoid arthritis may be defined as a "Chronic autoimmune inflammatory disease resulting in joint destruction. Immune complexes are formed in joints and excite an inflammatory response, termed complex mediated hypersensitivity."
Rheumatoid arthritis affects approximately 1% of the UK population; the commonest age of onset is between 25-55 years. The ratio of females: males is 2.5:1. Clinical manifestations may be classified as articular and extra-articular:
The bio psychosocial burden of chronic illness, common presentations of RA, common comorbidities associated with RA.