Miss
Miss She describes the pain as "sharp", grades it as 10/10 at its worst, and currently suffers the same pattern of pain on a daily basis. The pain is aggravated by lying flat, and relieved by trunk flexion. She takes no medication for the pain, it does not radiate, there are no associated factors, and it is not linked with her menstrual cycle.
Her cycle is currently regular with 5/5 days bleeding every 30 days. There was no intermenstrual or post-coital bleeding, and no discharge. Her cervical smears have been normal since she started on the screening programme aged 20.
Miss Miss She currently complains of a two-year history of dysparenuria on deep penetration.
Miss She has had six previous sexual partners, and has had a stable partner for the last seven years. She does not use contraception.
Her past medical history is unremarkable excepting removal of a naevus from her groin aged 11, and grommets in her ears aged 4.
She takes no medications, and has no known allergies.
Socially, Miss She smokes 10 cigarettes/day, and takes on significant alcohol. A systems review was unremarkable.
Considering the age, duration of complaint, and sexual history of the patient, the causes of chronic pelvic pain are limited. The most likely diagnoses at this stage are Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (PID), endometriosis, Pelvic pain syndrome (chronic pelvic pain + dysparenuria without organic cause). Less likely is irritable bowel syndrome (IBS), and other causes of pelvic masses. This may also be an atypical presentation of sub-acute appendicitis.
Miss This affects her performing her daily activities, has caused her to have irregular periods, causes her pain during sexual intercourse, and has caused her worry about her fertility as she has had unprotected regular sex with the same partner for the last 7 years. Socially it has affected her as she describes being embarrassed as she suddenly "doubles up" in pain without warning.
Mrs The left ovary was covered with multiple adhesions to surrounding structures, and the right ovary also displayed adhesions to the back of the broad ligament. The right fallopian tube looked unhealthy, and the right ovary had a clubbed appearance. The adhesions were divided, and a left salpingoophrectomy was performed.
'Clinical Evidence' has provided EBM on 'empirical vs. delayed treatment until the results of microbiological investigations are known' and 'how do different antimicrobial regimes compare?'
Pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) is a spectrum of infections of the female genital tract that includes endometritis, salpingitis, tuboovarian abscess, and peritonitis.
PID exclusively affects women, and around 1 in 50 sexually active women in the UK develop PID each year. It is most common in women aged between 15 and 24, although sexually active women of any age may contract PID.
Depending on the severity of the infection, patients with PID may be minimally symptomatic or may present with toxic symptoms of fever, nausea, vomiting, and severe pain. The commonest reported symptom of PID is uni/bilateral lower abdominal pain. However, vaginal discharge, lower back pain, and irregular vaginal bleeding also commonly occur.
One of the commonest signs of PID is lower abdominal tenderness. Pelvic examination may reveal mucopurulent cervical discharge, cervical excitation, uterine tenderness, and/or bilateral adnexal tenderness. An adnexal mass may be found in more extensive cases, suggesting a tuboovarian abscess, or peritonitis may be present, mimicking an acute surgical abdomen.
PID is a worldwide phenomenon, but the commonest causative agent(s) vary with location. In the West the commonest infective agents is   Anaerobes (e.g.
The pathogenesis of PID is incompletely understood. However, mononuclear cells are one of the hallmarks of chronic inflammation. In chronically or repeatedly infected individuals, increased chlamydial hsp (heat shock protein) expression secondary to the action of gamma interferon produced by the T-helper 1 cell mediated immune response might drive persistent chlamydial infection and chronic inflammation. Chronic infection might in turn lead to the fibrosis and scarring characteristic of the severe sequelae of
On Laparoscopy, adhesions between the ovaries, fallopian tubes peritoneum and other structures may be evident. The adhesions due to
Management of PID is either medical or surgical. Medical management must first begin with a sensitive; yet frank discussion about sexual health. Risk factors for PID include youth and sexual activity (under 25), multiple sexual partners, and not using barrier methods of contraception. The patient should be asked to bring her partner(s) in for screening to the clinic, and abstain from sexual activity with them until they have also been treated. Doxycycline 100mg bds for 7 days the current recommended outpatient regime. Side effects include possible interference with the pill, and photosensitivity. If there are doubts about compliance, 1g azithromycin may be prescribed immediately. If pregnant or lactating, erythromycin 500mg qds for 7 days may be used, although a test for cure 3 weeks later is recommended, as this method is less effective than Doxycycline.
Long-term sequelae of PID include infertility, chronic persistent pain, increased incidence of ectopic pregnancy, increased further risk of PID, and tuboovarian abscess.
Surgical management is indicated for chronic pain 2 to adhesions, and tuboovarian abscesses. The most common operation performed is salpingoophrectomy, although this has considerable effects on the woman's fertility. Appropriate counselling should be given regarding assisted conception and future family planning.
Up to 30% women become infertile after one episode of PID, 9% have an ectopic pregnancy, and 18% experience chronic pelvic pain.
Presentation and differential diagnosis of chronic pelvic pain. Medical and surgical management of PID. Psychological and financial consequences of infertility in young women.
Hillis SD, Joesoef R, Marchbanks PA,al. Delayed care of pelvic inflammatory disease as a risk factor for impaired fertility.
Walker CK, Kahn JG, Washington AE,al. Pelvic inflammatory disease: metaanalysis of antimicrobial regimen efficacy.
Walker CK, Workowski KA, Washington AE,al. Anaerobes in pelvic inflammatory disease: implications for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's guidelines for treatment of sexually transmitted diseases.