In 2003, the university I was working for was sponsored by the Ministry of Education in Taiwan to organize a five-day English summer camp. It aimed to help the suburban senior high students improve their English ability and bridge the knowledge gap between students in city and country. As an organizer and also instructor of the summer camp, I was aware that it was almost unlikely to make the participants progress significantly in terms of their English ability within such a limited time span of five days. Besides, coming from disadvantaged schools, these students were usually short of confidence and motivation in learning, which turned the whole task more challenging. Therefore, instead of focusing on the students' learning product, I wanted to put more emphasis on their learning process. What I was intended to do was to lower the participants' anxiety level, break down their defensive walls of inhibitions they set to protect their fragile language ego, and build up their confidence in using English. I set myself a goal of creating an encouraging and supportive learning atmosphere in the summer camp where the participants could use English for real communication, take a role of active learner, and feel dauntless with trial and error when using English. But the question was what teaching method and course design could turn them on to English. It seemed to me that the combination of drama and English teaching might be a practical solution. So this study sets out to develop an integrated English and drama course for the disadvantaged students and reports the findings of how educational drama methodology can be used to create a meaningful context for English communication, boost the students' self-confidence, promote social cooperation, and enhance learner autonomy.
The framework of the course design was based on the principles of cooperative learning, and the students' affective factors were also important considerations. In the following discussion, I am to provide a clear picture of the underlying rationale of this study and illuminate the benefits that drama can bring to the students' English learning.
According to the gathered data, the researcher found positive evidence showing that the drama curriculum and drama competition successfully enhanced the participants' self-esteem and self-confidence. Their anxiety levels were lowered with support from the cooperative learning group and they were more willing to take risk in trying out language use. The findings will be presented quantitatively and qualitatively as follows.
Drama has the potential to develop communication abilities, increase English learning and promote a positive self-concept in an interactive, fun way. Successful language learning requires the whole person to reach out in an integrated way - intellectual, physical, and affective. However, most English teachers in Taiwan rely mainly on grammar-translation-oriented teaching methods, in which English is taught in a vacuum as a set of language skills without immediate utility and only students' mental effort is called for. While some students can survive in this learning scenario by performing well on discrete-point tests, most of them are overwhelmed by the fear of using English as a communication tool and even lose their confidence. Drama offers the students a chance to rethink the way they learn English. Through drama, they can experiment not only with verbal aspects of language but also non-verbal communicative aspects. By working in a cooperative group, they gain confidence to interact. In the dramatic context, they are able to feel the language rather than memorizing it mechanically.
The summer camp ended two years ago but its influence is still felt today. In February 2005, a student formed an online community for the members of the summer camp and most of the participants have joined in. Two students emailed me about their decisions of applying for the drama department in university. One student has already entered university, majoring in English. Drama has yielded fruitful results beyond what I expected when designing the curriculum for the summer camp.