The initial agreement to commit theft is conspiracy, between Amy and Felicity, contrary to the section 1(1) of the The offence of carrying weapons falls under the second class of weapons of the
Theft involves the Appropriation is defined under section 3(1) as "any assumption by a person of the rights of an owner".  Putting a bottle of whisky in a bag amounted to appropriation whilst still on the shop premises; therefore the fact that Felicity and Amy have not left the train will not exculpate them. The
The wide definition of assumption encompassing any interference with the owner's property appears to be within the ambit of attempts, since it is not necessary that the accused successfully leaves with the property. This broad categorisation under the offence of theft reduces the significance of the
The Although intention to permanently deprive is relatively unambiguous, the concept of dishonesty is vague. Section 2 A two-fold test was developed from It is unequivocal that Amy and Felicity's behaviour would satisfy the
Judicial perceptions of dishonesty may vary creating uncertainty, exacerbated by the emphasis placed upon Implementing a definition of dishonesty would restrict the scope of the offence, although it is dubious whether absence of a definition broadens the offence of theft.
Robbery requires violence "immediately before or at the time of [theft]" Violence was not inherent to the acquisition of mobile phones, but merely part of the aftermath of theft.
Amy is also guilty attempted theft, requiring the The Issues arise as to whether prosecutions can ensue from an impossible attempt. The case of  The House of Lords exonerated the defendant since "to convict him of attempting to handle stolen goods would be to convict him not for what he did but simply because he had a guilty intention." This affirmed the view that legal impossibility negates liability for an attempt. Partington v. Williams Nock
The Despite this, in  Shivpuri A defendant was convicted of attempt to receive and distribute illegally imported drugs and pass on to third parties, notwithstanding that the true substance was in fact a "harmless vegetable matter". It is now widely accepted that impossible attempts are punishable; "innocent and guilty acts considered 'objectively' and independently of the state of mind of the actor cannot be sensibly maintained"
Amy has the requisite The law of attempts is currently too narrow, allowing the acquittal of attempters sufficiently proximate to merit conviction Fair labelling demands differentiation between offences of attempt according to degree of culpability. An attempt that fails due to police intervention is more reprehensible than an offender choosing to abandon his crime, which the current law fails to acknowledge The American Model Penal Code 'substantial step' is more favourable
It needs to be addressed whether injury to Caroline warrants liability beyond section 47, that of mere "actual bodily harm". Next up the hierarchy are the more serious offences of section 18 and 20 necessitating "wounding or causing/inflicting GBH". The case of  Loss of a sensory function is evidently an example of this type of harm rather than actual harm for which bruising may suffice The principal issue is whether Felicity could be convicted under section 18, "maliciously wounding or causing grievous bodily harm with intent" Felicity could escape liability for section 18 if intent cannot be proved.
 It must be proved that Felicity was subjectively aware that serious bodily harm was virtually certain. The use of a ruler could provide "objective evidence of premeditation" The CPS could argue that serious harm is virtually certain from stabbing a ruler into another's eye, but the bluntness of the instrument does not provide conclusive evidence. As the risk of blindness was not acute, the possibility of lesser injuries would eliminate 'virtual certainty'.  The replacement of 'find' affords to the jury more scope, or "moral elbow room"
It is likely that Felicity would be convicted under the lesser offence of section 20.  This was affirmed by Extending the law to include advertent reckless is constructive liability, contrary to the principle of fair labelling that there "must be a close match between the label attached to a crime and the nature and gravity of what D has done"
Section 18 is also not entirely consistent with fair labelling. It could be argued that it is too wide; accumulating liability intention can be inferred from virtual certainty to the Conversely, section 18 could be perceived as too narrow, enabling defendants to escape full liability for the consequences of their actions, where some degree of harm was intended but it is ambiguous as to the extent. This allows the crime to be dealt with within the scope of section 20. The gap between section 20 and 18 is too wide: a conviction under section 20 imposes up to five years' imprisonment compared to life imprisonment for section 18. The disparity in sentencing is disproportionate to the similarities of the two offences, inconsistent with fair labelling.
Felicity's act of punching would normally only constitute common assault The fault element falls short of murder because death or GBH was not virtually certain, hence intention cannot be inferred. For a conviction under unlawful and dangerous act manslaughter, it must be established that the act was unlawful; that the act was objectively dangerous; and that this crime caused the victim's death.
The unlawful act can be identified as common assault, entailing technical assault and battery. Felicity deliberately punched Delia, fulfilling the  This was backed by the House of Lords in Newbury It is clear to the reasonable person that Felicity's act would present some risk of harm to Delia, thus it is objectively dangerous.
Causation issues transpire when ascertaining whether the act was causally related to the victim's death. It is apparent in this case that 'but for' Felicity's act, Delia would not have fallen and hit her head and died.  Williams pushed and slapped a woman, causing her to fall, hit her head on a wall-mounted heater, damage her neck and die. He was convicted of unlawful and dangerous act manslaughter. The fall and subsequent events are consequential to the assault and not independent, hence no '
The three criteria can be established; therefore Felicity is guilty of unlawful and dangerous act manslaughter. This offence is too broad, ranging from acts that may amount to little more than inadvertence up to acts falling little short of murder The Law Commission proposes the abolishment of the offence It should be divided into discrete offences to assign just labels and sentences proportionate to crime. Constructive manslaughter takes the scope of liability beyond what D would have contemplated, contrary to the principle of fair labelling which advocates that difference in context and culpability associated with the killing should be marked by a separate offence Public opinion reinforces this notion; a survey of people in England and Wales revealed that ordinary people recognise considerable variations in gravity between homicides
The subject of complicity arises regarding Amy's involvement. Accomplice liability is derivative of the principal's offence combined with the fault element of intention to assist. It requires the The accessory must have the Amy assisted Felicity as co-principal in committing theft Similarly, Felicity is Amy's accomplice to the offence of attempted theft. Amy's 'aiding and abetting' could also be extended to the offences of GBH and manslaughter. The issue is whether liability is constructed out of her involvement in the joint enterprise, or whether Felicity's acts were outside the scope of the joint enterprise.
For acts to extend to accomplice liability, It could be argued that the typology of offences was foreseeable to Amy for two key reasons: Her knowledge of Felicity's violent temper and previous convictions of assault enabled her to foresee possible violence. Most significantly, their prior agreement to use the rulers to appear as armed in the event of disturbance takes the joint enterprise within the ambit of robbery, using force "or seeking to put any person in fear of being then and there subjected to force" Robbery is a crime of violence and from this it is possible to extend the scope of the enterprise to GBH or constructive manslaughter.
 This applies to other offences: "If the principal were charged with constructive manslaughter ... the accessory will also be liable for manslaughter if he foresees a risk that the principal offender might intentionally or recklessly (the Recklessness is sufficient This attributes liability to the accessory for advertent recklessness as sufficient the
The derivative approach, attributing liability to any offences contemplated as possible with the essential There is a moral distinction between recklessness and intent which should be reflected in sentencing and labelling. It is undesirable that law should impose responsibility for something outside the accessory's control and contrary to the doctrine of individual autonomy that the accomplice should take responsibility for the principal's action The requires the higher degree of The Germany also imposes a maximum of three-quarters of the principal's sentence These jurisdictions acknowledge the distinction between the blameworthiness of the accomplice and the principal that English practice ignores, consistent with fair labelling.