The most extensive population study of the early modern period was carried out by E.A. Wrigley and R.S. Schofield, In very general terms these criticisms focus upon the following main areas. The sample of four hundred and four parish registers used to estimate national population figures makes up only four percent of the total number of parishes in early modern England. In addition, the sample includes too many large parishes (usually Northern areas) and too few smaller parishes (usually Eastern areas). London is also underrepresented in the study due to its lack of surviving parish registers. Even good registers however were inaccurate for certain periods (such as during the civil war) and thus only for the year 1662 were all the registers fit to use.
Despite such criticism the information Wrigley and Schofield provide does appear a plausible reading of the demographic trends of early modern England. After all, the authors are aware that methodological shortcomings exist; this work does not pretend to be concrete evidence but merely a likely estimation. Furthermore the huge financial costs and time commitments involved in this kind of research make it unlikely that another work of this nature will be undertaken. These are the best results we have, and particularly when used in conjunction with localised studies as well as studies of social and cultural factors this is very revealing research. In this essay I am going to argue from a standpoint assuming that the data compiled by Wrigley and Schofield is a realistic estimation of population trends. However, I will argue that an acceptation of the population trends presented by the Cambridge Group does not necessitate an acceptation of their I will argue that fertility I will argue that the essential inter-linkage of these two factors makes any either/or demographical explanation implausible. Instead I will suggest that a model whereby
The demographic trends that Wrigley and Schofield have mapped out for early modern England begin with growth between 1541 and 1661; this growth was generally steady although it slowed during the 1550s and became rapid in the 1570s and 1580s. Between 1656 and 1686 the population decreased in size before stagnating and slightly recovering between 1686 and 1750. From 1750 onwards the vigorous growth of earlier periods was resumed, although Elizabethan growth rates were not reached until the 1790s. Thus there were two periods of growth divided by one hundred years or so from the mid seventeenth century to the mid eighteenth century when population numbers stagnated. As I have suggested this basic information seems both plausible and realistic, however Wrigley and Schofield's interpretation of this information; an attempt to understand what caused this rapid growth, check and decline followed by renewed growth, seems less plausible. Or in other words, was it fertility or mortality that was the definitive factor in determining these population trends.
The Cambridge Group certainly believed that '...marriage was the hinge upon which the demographic regime turned." They suggested that '...fertility change was more important than mortality change in altering population growth rates', that '...fertility change in turn chiefly reflected fluctuations in nuptiality' and that '...nuptiality was primarily determined by real wages'. Wrigley and Schofield themselves note the inevitable sacrifice of comprehensiveness with the construction of simple models, however they argue that the benefits gained in clarity are essential to understanding. This in turn was followed by 'a gently rising trend to reach 2.3 by 1756', before an acceleration of this trend 'to reach a peak value of 3.06 in 1816.' Thus they argue that 'towards and between the major turning points of about 1660 and 1815...there were very few marked departures from the trend line, but rather a steady progression.'
There has been a lot of criticism of this model, both in terms of the methodology used to get the data on fertility and the final results presented, but also in terms of the Malthusian framework in which these results are placed. The method used to estimate age at marriage was 'family reconstitution', which traced individuals' lives through their parish. This method requires both baptism and marriage to have taken place in the same parish and assumes out-migration rates are low. In many cases however the 'sparrow phenomenon' or people flitting in and out of the records made this method impossible; in fact only twelve parish registers provided reasonable estimates for age at marriage. Marriage did not even become a regulated and controlled institution before 1753 when laws were introduced in order to make those marriages not carried out in a church illegal. Before this point marriage could be legal simply through the saying of vows in front of a witness; Laura Gowing points out that before 1753 the promise to marry followed by sex also constituted legal if irregular marriage. John Hatcher argues that the fertility rates estimated were forced into the model of Malthusian preventative check which had already been formulated by the Cambridge Group before they even began their research.
Even if the marriage and fertility rates, potentially unrepresentative and framed as they may be, are accepted as plausible, questions have been raised about the placement of emphasis in Wrigley and Schofield's interpretation. David Weir argued that marital behaviour altered considerably over time causing a shift in the dominant factor affecting fertility and thus population trends. Some have noted that it is difficult to assert the dominance of fertility on population trends, particularly when within the boundaries of the Malthusian model. 'Imposing' this framework on the fertility data has required Wrigley and Schofield to argue that a 'long lag' relationship of about fifty years existed between a change in real wages and its affects on fertility. J.A. Goldstone accepts that a lag is a plausible explanation; however suggests that reducing it to a twenty year difference would be more accurate. Perhaps in cases where inheritance would depend on parental approval influence would be quite significant, but for the majority of the population inheritance would not have been left. Although I do not wish to argue in a deterministic fashion that mortality was the most important factor in shaping the population 'replacing one bald stereotype with another', it is important to look at the quite significant part played by mortality in order to question Wrigley and Schofield's interpretations.
The two parts of mortality; starvation and disease were both influences on the early modern population, not least because their presence pre-empted any potential rise in fertility through restricting marriage partners, increasing migration and affecting prices and wages. The influence of factors other than fertility can be seen in the rise of the population despite a fall in real wages; I am afraid that I remain unconvinced by the long lag theory and thus this slowness of response between the two seems to imply that mortality had more influence than Wrigley and Schofield suggested. John Hatcher points out that the volatility of both fertility and mortality during this time is suggestive not of Wrigley and Schofield's model where '...there were very few departures from the tend line', but of a model where many influences were working to shape the population. Hatcher also notes that assumptions made by Wrigley and Schofield to fill in gaps left by poor evidence and their small sample had led to the effects of mortality being underestimated. 'A far more severe impact is revealed by the registers not included in the study and also by the abundance of wills probated in a wide range of ecclesiastical jurisdictions." Additionally, Wrigley and Schofield's determination to prove the dominance of fertility can be seen in their relegation of mortality to a mere 'condition' of population change whereas fertility is considered a 'cause'; mortality is presented as something which affects fertility rather than as an influence on population in its own right. As Hatcher points out 'in any analysis of causality the designation of some factors as 'conditions' or 'circumstances' and others as 'causes' is liable to exert a powerful influence over the outcome." What Hatcher calls 'a tangle of contradictions and reservations' in fact 'lie behind the series of confident judgements...made.'
There are a number of issues surrounding the fertility led preventative check theory and the above criticisms are useful to demonstrate a rather general lack of accuracy in Wrigley and Schofield's model; however it is also useful to look at more specific studies to identify the effects of mortality on localised areas. Peter Laslett's study on famine in early modern England concluded that the threat of starvation or 'crisis mortality' was very unlikely to occur.
Disease had specific characteristics; it was often recorded in parish registers as a cause of death and appeared in other primary evidence such as wills. Famine did not have such a 'discernable pattern to help the historian identify it' it did not have such specific characteristics, it was rarely recorded in parish registers, and those who could write (more likely the upper sorts) would have been less likely to feel the effects of famine and able to relocate in plenty of time before actual starvation set in. Several neighbouring villages would also have increased deaths, a correlation between prices and mortality should be noticeable, usually some reference to dearth would exist in one form of source or another and there should be fewer conceptions than usual. Appleby discovered that famine had played a significant part in shaping the population in Cumberland and Westmorland; at certain times it was the dominant factor causing the death toll to mount, at other times it made areas more susceptible to disease (through lessened immune systems, and through desperate importing of foods from areas with epidemics) and made women less willing and less able to conceive.
In their study of Mid-Wharfedale parishes in 1623 Moira Long and May Pickles also found that evidence of 'crisis mortality' was often a part of early modern life, if not in the form of full blown famine certainly in the form of 'crisis months'. Victor Skipp found considerable regional variation in occurrences of famine and shortages which might conceivably have led to their relative invisibility in the small sample of Wrigley and Schofield.
Throughout this essay so far, I have tried to emphasise the continuous links between mortality and fertility during the early modern period; it is this essential inter-linkage which I wish to look at more explicitly now. There were interconnections between disease, migration, death, birth rate, price and wage, amongst others; in practice of course the nature of and the strengths of these links varied, nevertheless they did exist. The incidence of famine whether long or short term affected disease rates, fertility rates and migration rates as well as affecting prices and wages as the population lessens. Likewise, high fertility could force prices up, wages down, encourage migration and make disease more probable. It seems to me that the circular nature and knock on effect of all these factors combining to shape each other and the population would be better described in terms of a set of dominoes rather than as a hinge which suggests not only the Does not the very reality of high fertility demand low levels of disease and plenty of food? And does not the very reality of famine demand high levels of population? As Laslett suggests 'each part of our subject is also our whole subject...the fund of food was obviously related to age at marriage and numbers marrying.'
Hatcher suggests that Wrigley and Schofield manipulate data to exaggerate fertility and lessen the significance of mortality; he argues that the presentation of information in Although Hatcher accepts that this was purely coincidental, 'a historical accident', it still demonstrates that the prominence awarded to fertility by Wrigley and Schofield is not necessarily historically accurate but is based more upon interpretation, evidence and methodology used. From '1551 to 1566 falling fertility was the main driving force until the "golden period of low mortality" turned the tables; 1571 to 1611 was a period of relatively stable fertility and mortality "fertility and mortality contributed equally to the steady fall", fertility was dominant from 1671 to 1691 but mortality was most clearly the more important influence on growth rates from 1691 to 1751." Hatcher sums up these characteristics and finds that 'fertility is held to dominate for around thirty-five years of the two-hundred year time span, mortality for around sixty-five years and that for a century the two variables exerted approximately equal influence." This evidence is 'immediately contradicted' by Wrigley and Schofield through the use of 'quinquennial averages', and the discarding of 'three episodes of very high mortality before 1751'.
In conclusion, despite the problems with Wrigley and Schofield's methodology and evidence the population trends they map out are plausible and the best figures historians have to work with. I have suggested however that in many ways their interpretation of the causality of this trend is flawed. The judgement that living standards and wage rates determined nuptiality and therefore fertility, or that 'marriage is the hinge upon which the demographic regime turned' is inaccurate. Family reconstitution provided data on fertility which was unreliable and unrepresentative. However, even accepting these methodological limitations the figures then seemed to be moulded to fit a Malthusian framework of preventative check homeostasis. The 'long lag' theory used to justify the lack of direct correlation between fertility and real wages over simplifies a very complex phenomenon whilst simultaneously relegating other important factors to mere conditions or circumstances rather than causes of population change. The fact that we do not know enough about marriage patterns, non-church marriages, or the parental influences over children of every day people makes the long lag an unsustainable claim.
The deterministic nature of this model undermines the significance of mortality and other factors upon population changes and upon shaping fertility. The relative instability and volatility of both fertility and mortality suggests more detail is needed in the model Wrigley and Schofield provide. Evidence such as those registers not used in Mortality in the form of starvation was often extremely hard to identify due to its lack of recording in parish registers. The type of scarcity which never developed in to full blown famine is even harder to spot, but was equally influential in shaping fertility and population. Studies of Westmorland and Cumberland, the Forest of Arden and of Mid-Wharfedale parishes reveal a mistaken and repeated underplaying of starvation, and its often very localised nature. In fact the presence and at times domination of mortality was important and deserves more attention in Similarly, although I have not focused greatly upon the influence of migration and in particular sex specific migration on population trends, through reducing the pool of those eligible for marriage, its importance should not be underestimated either. Each affected the others and each in turn was affected by many other minor demographic variables. Therefore I have suggested that a model whereby the essential interlinks of mortality, migration and fertility would prove most accurate. Hatcher claims that in total between 1551 and 1751 'fertility is dominant for 17.5 percent of the time, mortality for 32.5 percent and for 50 percent of the time the two variables exerted approximately equal influence." Manifestly he argues that causality cannot be established until it is accepted that fertility and mortality were both important factors within the early modern period '...and a host of social, cultural and economic factors played on them to help fashion demographic behaviour." To finally answer the question, I would suggest that the metaphor of fertility as a 'hinge upon which the demographic regime turned', be discarded and replaced with a metaphor which better encompasses the historical reality of the exertion of manifold influences, and a co-relation of factors which developed to shape what was infact less a regime, and more a volatile commune. 'Any valid depiction of reality is likely to resemble a vast irregular web'. 'Patterns of births, marriages, deaths and migrations helped to shape society and economy and were themselves shaped by society and economy' as I have attempted to show in this essay.