Usually the organism remains in natural reservoirs involving arthropods, lagomorphs and rodents. When humans disrupt these lifecycles they contract Less then ten organisms are required for tularemia to be contracted, which has generated significant scientific interest, especially for its potential use as a biological weapon.
This essay broadly describes the current information available concerning
The history of the discovery of The essay concludes by summarising why
 Soken observed a connection between the consumption of hares and the onset of a condition characterised by lymphadeonopathy. In 1911 an outbreak of a plague-like disease occurred in Tulare, California USA. McCoy investigated this outbreak and failed to isolate the causative organism of plague on agar, which was initially believed to be the culprit. McCoy concluded that a new bacterium had been discovered and it was named 'Bacterium tularense' in 1912.
Francis and Mayne, (1921), determined that 'Bacterium tularense' was the origin of hare-fever, deerfly fever and the rodent plague-like disease seen in Tulare. In 1947 Dorofeev determined that 'Bacterium tularense' was a new genus of bacteria which has since been confirmed by 16S rRNA sequencing, he named the genus
Four subspecies of
 It is estimated to cause 70% of tularemia cases in humans in the US
After numerous tularemia outbreaks in Europe during the Second World War, Japan, America and the Soviet Union observed the damage this organism could inflict upon enemy troops and began to study it as a possible biological weapon. America and the Soviet Union began to stockpile biological weapons including those capable of disseminating Thankfully, America destroyed its stockpiles in 1973 but the drive to research Such research hopes to better prepare the military, medical personnel and civilians if a threat of a biological agent arises.
 It is a small gram negative coccobacillus as illustrated by Figure 1, the morphology of
This pleomorphic organism is non motile, surrounded by a lipid capsule and an intracellular pathogen. It is a saprophyte meaning that it is able to utilise decaying organic matter and survive most conditions including low temperatures, moist soil, water and even straw.
 The first lifecycle is by far the most common in causing infection in humans. The tick-lagomorph cycle predominates in North America. The incidence of infection peaks in June and November when tick populations increase and when humans come into contact with lagomorphs and their ectoparasites respectively. Figure 3, the tick lagomorph cycle demonstrates how humans can easily disrupt this lifecycle and become infected with
The second lifecycle involves the ingestion of contaminated water or a bite from an infected mosquito. This lifecycle is predominantly found in Europe and is known to involve rodents more so then lagomorphs. Epidemics of tularemia are associated with this lifecycle of Figure 4, the rodent-mosquito cycle demonstrates how humans can contract this disease.
 It is suspected that no primary reservoir exists as 100 species of mammals or more, 50 species of arthropod and many amphibian and fish species have been shown by Burroughs It is evident that  Protozoa are found in water and as these organisms are similar to macrophages, it is suggestible that
The worldwide incidence of tularemia is unknown, possibly due to under-diagnosis through inexperience and underreporting and possibly because it tends to occur in rural areas. Outbreaks of tularemia in the US have been declining steadily since the 1940's as demonstrated by Figure 5, the decline in the cases of tularemia.
Outbreaks are associated with the tick-lagomorph lifecycle as shown by Figure 4. A decline in the incidence of this disease is due to susceptible individuals such as hunters and trappers becoming more aware of the disease. The decline in the practice of hunting and eating hare is another contributor. Figure 5 and Figure 6 demonstrate the decline in the number of tularemia cases.
Generally the USA has 0.05-0.15 cases per 100,000 people on average Outbreaks of tularemia in Europe are associated with contaminated water supplies leading to dramatic outbreaks. For example in Sweden, the annual number of reported cases of disease in humans over the period from 1973-1985 ranged from less than five cases to over 500
Although  The most common vectors appear to be the ticks such as Tularemia can be contracted through undercooked infected meat, entry through broken skin, urine contaminated water, inhalation of contaminated dust, bites from vectors and eye infections from contaminated skin.
The symptoms of tularaemia can differ depending upon the route of transmission. Ulceroglandular tularemia is the most common form of the disease. A tick bite, normally to the lower limb, transmits After three to five days of incubation, These papules often ulcerate and form an eschar.  Macrophages stimulated by Common symptoms include 39-40.6 Glandular tularemia produces similar symptoms but no ulcer forms at the inoculation site. Figure 7, the different types and clinical symptoms of tularemia, demonstrates the generalised symptoms of tularemia.
Gastrointestinal tularemia is contracted from the consumption of infected meat or water. Diarrhoea, stomach pains, vomiting, acute bowel ulceration and flu-like symptoms are known to manifest.
Oropharyngeal tularemia is an infection in the tonsils causing them to become inflamed and a creamy pseudomembrane to form.
Pneumonic tularemia is the most sever form of the disease, especially if caused by Symptoms, as shown by Figure 7, manifest but can persist for weeks and months if antibiotic intervention does not occur. Often prostration, hypotension, septicaemia and death can occur with this form of tularemia.
A relapse of tularaemia is known to occur if the individual concerned has been frequently exposed to tularemia. In such a case granulomas can form in which the organism is surrounded by cells and macrophages preventing its destruction by phagocytosis or antibiotics which can result in latent infections.
The strain of tularemia determines the mortality rate of tularemia.
The virulence of an organism refers to the ability for the pathogen concerned to cause disease.  However, although the organism demonstrates some typical virulence characteristics, not all of them appear to determine the virulence of the organism.
Upon infection of a host, for example from a tick bite, As the organism is non motile, it disseminates via the lymph until it reaches the local lymph nodes. During these early stages of infection, the bacteria must resist lysis from complement and find a suitable cell in which to replicate. The lipid capsule prevents lysis by complement and phagocytosis by macrophages. Macrophages are activated by the foreign
 The bacteria were only identified in the blood sample containing macrophages confirming the prediction Upon encountering a macrophage, Usually, upon infection a macrophage will be activated by CD4 T cells which produce cytokines. This causes the vesicles containing the  Its genome encodes an acid phosphatase enzyme which is capable to preventing this fusion and the resulting respiratory burst. The respiratory burst is the release of a mixture of oxidising chemicals such as nitrous oxide and hydrogen peroxide. It is thought that Recent research suggests that these acidic conditions can help obtain iron from molecules such as transferring indicating that iron is important for
Studies concluded by Golovlior In particular, a protein of mass of 23-KDa was shown
 This prevents inflammation and the attraction of other immune cells to the site of infection. The 23-KDa protein released by Another virulence factor is encoded by the gene The 29-KDa protein it encodes is suspected to act as an ion pump for toxic radicals MinD is therefore able to pump put free radicals when a macrophage is activated and a respiratory burst triggered.
Baron and Nano identified genes They are an operon which regulated the release of the four proteins which appear to be unregulated when It is thought that these genes are shock genes, stimulated by the reduction in nutrients.
After
It appears that tularemia cannot be resolved by the action of the immune system alone. Only if infected macrophages are stimulated early enough foe example if alveolar macrophages are stimulated by INF-Y before the As such, antibiotic treatments are required.
 Tularemia is diagnosed if evidence suggests an individual may have been in contact with ticks, rodents or lagomorphs in countries where the disease is endemic. Recent threats of biological warfare could also suggest manifestation of tularemia if a relatively high number of individuals are admitted with similar symptoms. Thankfully, An immunoassay test will indicate that an individual has tularemia as antibodies against the bacterium will increase by four times. Such a titer of 1:160 or greater is confirmation that the individual has tularemia. Although PCR could be used, Grunow et al reported that some human samples contain substances capable of inhibiting PCR therefore as such it is not a reliable diagnostic method.
The other method of diagnosis is through the culture of It produces distinctive colonies as shown by Figure 8, a culture of
Tularemia responds well to antibiotic therapy. Streptomycin is the drug of choice for adults and should be administered at 7.5-15mg/kg intramuscularly twice daily for ten days It works by inhibiting protein synthesis by binding to the 30S subunit of the ribosome in Children should also be administered with streptomycin but at a higher dose of 15/20mg/kg intramuscularly twice daily for ten days Other antibiotics such as gentamicin tetracycline and chloramphenicol can be used but are less affected.
Tularemia is not known to be transmitted between people so isolation is not required and neither are post-exposure antibiotics although if a suspected biological attack has occurred, treatment of exposed individuals with doxycycline and ciprofloxacin can be used to ensure tularemia does not manifest. As such,
The risk of contracting tularemia can be reduced by a few simple procedures. People inhabiting endemic areas as shown in Figure 2, the distribution of Repellents containing diethyltoluamide and permethrin can also be used as these deter the ticks. Farmers, butchers, hunters and trappers should always take these precautions and always wear face masks when handling lagomorphs, rodents and hay or straw to prevent pneumonic tularemia.
Even though Usually laboratory personnel are vaccinated with The continuous threat of the use of biological weapons from the Middle East and extremist groups has caused the drive to develop an effective vaccine against Although strain LVS is capable of inducing significant protection against the bacteria, it does not provide lifelong nor complete immunity. Exposure of previously vaccinated volunteers to 2000 colony forming units or more produced symptoms of tularemia, albeit mild. New research in this area hopes to develop a more effective vaccine and explore vaccination via the respiratory route which appears to be very effective. Such research will not be discussed in this essay.
 It has numerous reservoirs which can never be eradicated from the environment and as such we can never be free from the threat of this pathogen. If dispersed by an aerosol, This combined with a low infectious does will have disastrous consequences. If medical personnel are unable to recognize tularemia and threat it accordingly, resources will be inefficiently used and more importantly deaths can occur.
 Its lipid capsule prevents phagocytosis and lysis by complement, the acid phosphatase enzyme prevents respiratory burst and is able to inhibit cytokine release by the macrophages. However, the lipopolysaccharide layer of the cell envelope does not act as an endotoxin. This is the extent of the knowledge available concerning the virulence of One suggestion as to why its virulence characteristics have not been elucidated to is its unique genome. Although This indicates that Vital research must therefore occur in order to increase understanding of this pathogen such as how it penetrates the gut in gastrointestinal tularemia.
The use of biological weapons is not a new phenomenon. Japan experimented with biological agents during the world wars, as did Iraq and Iran in the gulf war and most recently anthrax attacks occurred in America in 2001. A real example of the threat and the scale of destruction biological weapons can cause has yet to arise. Even with careful planning and exercises such as the Hanuman Redux Exercise, Louisville Kentucky USA, 2001, nations cannot adequately prepare themselves for biological attacks. The Centre for Disease Control concluded that the Hanuman Redux exercise handled the situation adequately and effectively. Models determined that 200,000 people would have been exposed resulting in 4,800 cases and 1,700
With continuous threats from extremist groups and the availability of