Strain construction involves the transfer of specific alleles or mutations of a gene from one cell to another. There are four main selection approaches to constructing a new strain of bacteria. These are direct selection, co-transduction, transposon tagging and penicillin enrichment.
Direct selection is where if a cell is an auxotroph, you are able to select for the prototroph or drug resistance in other situations.
Co-transduction is the simultaneous transfer of two genetic markers by transduction. Transposon tagging is where you can select for the transfer of a selectable marker if a transposon is next to it. Finally penicillin enrichment is a relatively ineffective technique for increasing the proportion of auxotrophic mutants.
The five strains of bacteria available for strain construction all have mutations in a variety of genes. The information provided concerning the mutated gene Strain UWB103 has the
As such UWB103 will be chosen as the starting strain.
The phenotypic requirements of the desired new strain must be Trp- Met- Amz- EndA-. It does not matter if drug resistance markers or transposons are present in the final strain. Technically the order in which the desired strain can be constructed does not matter. I have chosen to construct the strain the following way for ease of explanation.
This mutation cannot be directly selected for. The
Co-transduction can therefore be used to introduce the trp- phenotype into strain UWB103.
Strain UWB104 contains the When bacteriophage BAZ is grown on strain UWB104, a proportion of the bacteria will incorporate the
The resulting lysate should be grown with strain UWB101 on minimal media with streptomycin, glucose and tryptophan. The streptomycin selects for those colonies where the A proportion of the colonies will have had the
When fresh bacteriophage BAZ is grown on these colonies, some of the bacteriophage will incorporate the The resulting lysate should be grown with strain UWB103 and plated on minimal media with streptomycin, glucose and tryptophan. A proportion of the cells will have had the
In distinguish between cells which are tryptophan auxotrophs and the prototrophs, replica plating should be performed onto minimal media with glucose and tryptophan and minimal media with glucose. Streptomycin is not required as the transduction of gene Colonies which only grow on the minimal media with glucose and tryptophan are the required colonies.
These colonies should be re-plated onto minimal media with glucose and tryptophan and designated UWB106. This strain is
This mutation cannot be directly selected for, however, the Co-transduction should therefore be used to introduce the
Strain UWB102 contains a
Bacteriophage BAZ should be grown on strain UWB102 and a proportion of bacteriophage will incorporate the wild type
The resulting lysate should be grown with strain UWB106 and plated on minimal media with sucrose, tryptophan and methionine. Any cells where the
To ensure the mutated All of the colonies should be technically only grow on minimal media with sucrose tryptophan and methionine.
Such colonies should be picked and re-plated onto fresh minimal media with sucrose, tryptophan and methionine. This strain will be designated UWB107 and is
Strain UWB105 contains a pool of insertions of transposon Tn
Some of the bacterial cells in strain UWB105 will have a transposon inserted next to the When bacteriophage BAZ is grown with UWB105, a proportion of the bacteriophage will incorporate the transposon and
The resulting lysates should be grown with strain UWB104 as it is the only strain which does not contain a mutation in The lysate and UWB104 cells should be plated out on nutrient agar with erythromycin.
The resulting colonies indicate that Tn
The resulting blue colonies indicate that the transposon has 'hopped' onto the genome of the bacteria but has not transferred the mutated
White colonies indicate that the transposon was inserted near the These colonies will be designated strain UWB108.
The final strain must be able to produce amazin. In order to convert UWB107 into an amazin producing strain, a back cross on strain UWB108 must be performed.
Bacteriophage BAZ should be grown on strain UWB108. As all the transposons will be located in the
The resulting lysate should be grown with strain UWB107 and plated onto nutrient agar and erythromycin. Any resulting white colonies indicate that the Tn
The resulting blue colonies indicate that the wild type
A blue colony should be picked and re-plated onto minimal media with sucrose, tryptophan and methionine and designated strain UWB109. This strain is Figure 1 illustrated this process.