Influenza A virus causes pandemics as continued selective pressure from the immune response causes frequent mutations at antigenic sites. These accumulate most frequently in the five epitopes of the haemagglutinin subunit, forcing the immune response to alter to achieve virus clearance.
Occasionally, genetic reassortment can occur between two co-circulating influenza strains. New haemagglutinin and neuraminidase subtypes are acquired, resulting in antigenic shift and substantial mortality due to the lack of pre-existing immunity.
This laboratory investigation demonstrated the fundamental assays, haemagglutination assay, haemagglutination inhibition assay and infectivity assay aid influenza characterisation. It was demonstrated that antigenic drift can happen gradually if one epitope mutation is selected for at a time. If two epitopes are selected, the virus is completely neutralised.
Influenza A is a major pathogen and a leading cause of death in infants, the immunocompromised and the elderly 9. In the US alone, an average of 51,000 deaths occurs annually due to influenza 18. This highly contagious respiratory disease causes pandemics and epidemics resulting in high mortality and morbidity, which could be prevented through vaccination.
The 1918 pandemic of H1N1 is ranked as one of the three most destructive human epidemics with a death toll approximately 25 million 15. It is estimated that the annual epidemics have had a more significant impact on human health than the three pandemics combined 16. Since 1918, the other pandemics have been H2N2 1957, H3N2 1968 and H1N1 again in 1977 11. It is believed that we are overdue for another pandemic 19.
The threat of a new pandemic is believed to come from 'bird flu' or H5N1. Influenza strain A/Hong Kong/156/97 initially appeared in Hong Kong in 1997 from crossing the species barrier from birds to humans 7. Since then it has resulted in the culling of millions of birds, 147 human cases with 78 deaths 20. As yet, H5N1 has yet to acquire mutation(s) which would allow efficient transmission between humans. As the virus is already demonstrating resistance to the anti-viral drug amantadine 7, the pressure to develop a vaccine against H5N1 is rising.
Influenza viruses are classified within the orthomyxovirus family, figure 2.1. There are three main types A, B and C of which A and B cause serious disease 16. Influenza A is classified into subtypes based upon the degree of homology between the haemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) surface proteins 4. The 16 subtypes of HA and 9 of NA 2 generate 144 different virus combinations which can and potentially cause disease.
The main antigenic sites are the three envelope proteins, of which, HA and NA are the most important. M1 is the least antigenic of these, forming proton channels which span the envelope 6. The HA protein trimer has an important role in viral entry and uncoating 15, figure 2.2, and binds to sialic acid on the cell surface allowing fusion to occur.
NA cleaves the terminal N-acetyl acid or sialic acid by a hydrolysis reaction. This is important for viral egress as it allows the removal of surface sialic acid at the release site to prevent binding upon budding and subsequent re-infection of the cell.
HA and NA proteins are the main antigenic sites targeted by the adaptive response. The five antigenic sites on the HA protein 8, figure 2.2, elicit a neutralising antibody response. Regular selection pressure from antibodies and the lack of proof reading ability in the viral RNA polymerase 4 leads to an accumulation of sense mutations in the HA sequence which enable the virus to evade the immune response and infect susceptible hosts. This finding was confirmed by Knossow et al in 1984 whose X-ray crystallography data illustrated that escape mutants have very small changes in HA structure. This antigenic variability is termed antigenic drift and is characterised by the acquisition of less than four amino acid changes in two different antigenic sites 4, 12.
Antigenic shift is essentially the reassortment of genetic material of two influenza viruses from different species upon co-infection of a host. Unpredictable recombination results in the acquisition of a new H or N subtypes to which the population is unlikely to have pre-existing immunity 4. Of the 144 possible serotypes, we have only been exposed to four. Although not all combinations may cause pandemics, influenza still remains a significant threat to human health.
This laboratory focuses upon the H1N1 influenza virus A/PR/8/34 (PR8), isolated in 1934 and attenuated due to repeated passaging in embryonated chicken eggs. The aims of the laboratory are outlined in the laboratory manual 13.
The experimental procedures are described in detail in the laboratory manual 13. There was one change to the materials used in the final sequence purification step in experiment 8, which involved the addition of blue dye separately to the reaction mixture rather than with the acetate.
Influenza possesses several characteristics which can be exploited for use in identification and quantitative techniques. Chicken eggs provide an appropriate culture system for cheaply producing high yields, with minimal contamination. They contain 2,3 NANA not human 2,6 NANA which induces mutations in the HA protein to allow efficient growth. However, not all influenza virus strains replicate efficiently in eggs 8, therefore it would be ideal to develop a mammalian cell culture system allowing rapid growth and reduced harvesting time. Currently, no such system exists which permits cost effective production of high viral titres.
HA subtypes can be identified using HA and HI assays, rapidly, cheaply and reproducibly to a high degree of accuracy and thus are advantageous over PCR or Elisa's. When compared to infectivity assays, HA's are used preferentially as fewer resources are needed, they are less complicated and live virus need not be used, reducing infection risk. Both assays produce comparable data, which may not occur for other viruses. However, variation may arise due to experimental differences such as egg batches.
The infectivity assay generated anomalous results, figure 4.3. This may have occurred due to contamination as the yolks looked abnormal and the harvested fluid was of low volume, dark and cloudy. Secondly, the 10 -7 eggs were inoculated last to prevent viral carry over from low to high virus dilutions therefore less care may have been taken in maintaining sterility and technique. Thirdly, the virus may have settled in the Eppendorf and the solution was not thoroughly mixed before injecting, leading to a greater proportion of PBS being injected than virus. Finally, a higher virus dilution may have been inoculated into these eggs, causing ambiguous data for 10 -7.
When compared to the HA assay, figure 4.1, 7.466x10 9 IU/ml was obtained for infectious units whereas in the infectivity assay 10 9.1ID 50/ml was calculated. The values are very similar, both being in the range of 10 9 therefore experimental differences such as different egg batches, contamination and concentration variations may have led to the slight difference between the values. HA assays give total counts regardless of whether the virus is infectious or not, whereas infectivity assays provide an end point of infectivity as the virus is diluted. Therefore both samples contain a similar proportion of infectious virus.
From these experiments it can be concluded that the HA assay provides accurate, comparable data for determining infectivity of a virus titre and the titre needed to cause 50% agglutination.
HI assays can rapidly characterise influenza subtypes if multiple experiments are conducted simultaneously, using specific antibodies. Calculation of HAU/ml enables antibody optimisation whilst allowing comparisons to be made between different antibody efficacies to inhibit the same virus. HA and HI assays can be straightforwardly adapted to allow high throughput analysis, invaluable when developing therapeutic agents or characterising many samples. However, serological characterisation of influenza strains does not distinguish between viral groups or indicate that an antibody does not bind 7. Progressive antigenic drift results in a few mutations which may not be detected by the antibody used, these are only detected by sequencing and molecular analysis.
The NA activity assay, density gradient and velocity gradient experiments reinforced understanding of influenza properties and common virology techniques. Experiment 6 demonstrated that crbcs are denser than mrbcs because crbcs are nucleated, DNA is heavier than protein and as mrbcs lose their nucleus during maturity, crbcs will travel further down the gradient. Crbcs and mrbcs differ in mass, density and shape, crbcs are denser, have more mass due to a nucleus and are slightly larger and oval. Therefore the velocity gradient demonstrated that crbcs have a greater sedimentation value and pellet faster than mrbcs. For both the velocity and density gradients, another faint band was seen in the mrbcs samples as some cells may still have contained a nucleus.
Experiment 7 demonstrated that escape mutant virus 9 generated a possible end point against MAb1. This may have occurred due to blood volume differences or most likely, steric inhindrence of MAb1, which may still be able to bind to the particle preventing agglutination from occurring.
The five antigenic sites of HA provoke a neutralising immune response. As figure 5.1 demonstrates, a single mutation was generated in the MAb1 escape mutant at residue 97. However, the sequence data was ambiguous, appendices 10 and 11, demonstrating equal fluorescence for a G or T nucleotide at this position. This may indicate a population of two mutants in the sample or an ambiguous result, which may require repeat sequencing. Residue 97 maps to residue 152 located in the Sb antigenic site of HA. MAb2 escape mutant encoded a valine at position 97 and a glutamic acid residue at position 85. This indicates that the double escape mutant was formed from either the valine MAb1 mutant population or that the sequence data was ambiguous but was in fact valine. Glutamic acid at residue 85 maps to residue 140, which is between residues 139 and 141 in the Ca2 antigenic site of HA.
When wild-type PR8 was incubated with MAb1 and MAb2 simultaneously, the harvested virus was neutralised whereas when escape mutants were generated using neutralising antibody directed against one epitope at one time, double escape mutants were generated. This occurred because when two neutralising antibodies are directed against two different epitopes, the virus would need to mutate at these two sites simultaneously. This event is extremely rare and therefore it was expected that a double mutant for wild-type PR8 could not be produced in one incubation step.
Influenza evades the immune response by mutations in its major antigenic epitopes. It is proposed, that mapping changes in these regions will allow future antigenic drift to be predicted. Currently several models, mathematical and graphical have been proposed 1, 9, 10, 14, 17, which rely on gradual antigenic change to generate escape mutants 9, 17. Identification of these crucial epitopes will narrow the search for candidate vaccine strains 9 and allow understanding of the virus evolution and therapeutic design to stay ahead.
Vaccination has the potential to decrease transmission, causing a decrease in frequency of further antigenic drift 1. The HA1 region of H3N2 changes at a rate of 6 nucleotides substitution per genome per year 10 thus, it is essential that these sites are identified in both this and other influenza subtypes to allow effective vaccine production. However, circulating subtypes must still be monitored as 95% of strains survive less than 1 year and infect few people 5 and thus, influenza's dynamic nature may still result in regular vaccine updation.
Due to the rigorous selection pressures imposed upon this virus by our immune system and the threat of a pandemic looming imminently, the need to develop tissue culture systems for virus production and a cross-protecting vaccine may enable us to control this disease rather than cure it.
Influenza virus will continue to pose a significant threat to human health. Antigenic shift and progressive antigenic drift allows influenza to evade the immune system and develop resistance to anti-virals and vaccines. This laboratory investigation successfully demonstrated that antigenic drift occurs gradually against a single selective pressure at a time.
The outbreak of SARS highlighted how prepared we were for an outbreak of a respiratory infection. However, influenza is more easily transmitted and unlikely to be controlled through screening and quarantine measures alone 4. Intercontinental travel is likely to exacerbate the problem, therefore the race to develop a protective vaccine to overcome influenza and its progressive antigenic drift has never been so important.