The voyage of Christopher Columbus, in the late fifteenth century, motivated subsequent European explorations of North America, for example John Cabot of England in 1497, and Juan Ponce de Leon of Spain in 1513. Whereas the failure of Cabot's voyage led to an abandonment of exploration until the late sixteenth century, the Spanish continued to explore throughout the era. Spanish expeditions along the North American coast were led by Hernando de Soto between 1539 and 1543, and inland missions under Tristan de Luna between 1559 and 1561, then by Juan Padro between 1566 and 1581. The discovery of the As a result, both England and Spain founded early coastal settlements in North America in the late sixteenth century and throughout the seventeenth century. Although English and Spanish colonies each had their own distinctive 'colonial identity'
Both countries' settlements attracted migrants by offering a geographical extension of the search for employment and stability, when all opportunities in their motherland had been exhausted. On the other hand, Bailyn asserts that it is not known On the other hand, many Spaniards were 'forced to leave profitable positions and become soldiers." This is comparable to English convicts who were sent to North America, often as servants.
The earliest successful Spanish settlement in North America was in Florida's capital, St. Augustine, which was established under Pedro Menendez de Aviles in 1565. Although trading outposts had already been established earlier in the century, for example in Columbia, St. Augustine's was destined to be a military outpost from where the Spanish could defend their trade routes and treasure from privateers sanctioned by the English government (until the 1604 Peace Treaty). The majority of the small Spanish population in Florida were Thus, there were few families, and those that did exist were often hybrid as a result of intermarriages, with their children being identified as English settlements were not so complex as their 'Northern American societies saw less racial mixture." The complex stratification of the Spanish is further enhanced by the variations between Hispanic immigrants in St. Augustine, including divisions between As a result, St. Augustine has accurately been illustrated as 'a melting pot of ethnic groups, loosely bound together by... the Spanish Crown." Corbett significantly observes that the source of migration to St. Augustine, during the period of 1671 to 1691, was actually from Spanish Mexico, highlighting internal migration from colonies of New Spain. English settlements also contained people derived from varying ancestries, as a result of internal movements, particularly in the middle colonies of New York and Pennsylvania.
The earliest English colonists 'preferred to search for precious metals, in emulation of the Spanish conquistadores." However, in direct contrast to early Spanish incentives for North American colonies as military bases, the result of the three English missions to Roanoke in the 1580s, despite Consequently, the English decided to establish a permanent self-sustaining settlement there and in 1587, under Sir Walter Raleigh, 'the first English families to settle in the Americas' However, its success was minimal as it had been mysteriously abandoned by the 1590s. This differs significantly with St. Augustine, which, although being burnt down in 1586 and rebuilt, remained a permanent settlement for two hundred years. It is ironic that St. Augustine's was not originally intended as a permanent colony yet persisted as one nonetheless, despite never significantly increasing in terms of population, whereas Roanoke's
Predominant similarities of both English and American settlements were some of the reasons for the founding of, and migration to them. Trade and profit through the exploitation of the New World were key motivational factors. This was particularly true of the English who wished to break the Spanish monopoly over North America, consequently leading them to a greater share in the American wealth. Thus internal competition and rivalry for prestige and prosperity was stimulated. However, the English were unsuccessful in their formation of the economic settlement of Jamestown, at Virginia's Chesapeake Bay in 1607, as it was built by a malarial swamp that led to the death of the majority of the migrants.
The principal reason for the proceeding English settlements in New England were based upon a diverse religious vision of a pure colony, as opposed to financial importance, incited by the Pilgrims in 1620, and followed by the migration of the Puritans the following decade. Unfortunately, 'New England ultimately failed as a "city upon a hill"'
McFarlane distinguishes between religion in both Spanish and English settlements. Although it had initially played a similar role in the formation of both sets of settlements, it went on to adopt varying and separate roles in the social element of each. Their religious structures differ considerably in terms of relationship with political and social life. For example, 'English... colonies remained without a formal nobility, even on the small scale that the Spaniards created in their colonial realms." However, New England suffered fewer problems, arguably as a result of their religious attitudes and hence the establishment of a good relationship with the Native Indians.
The pattern of migrants settling in Virginia represented the English population, mostly consisting of 'middling sorts,' As in St. Augustine, many early English settlements contained few women or families, which were significant as the stable 'foundation of colonial society'.
Maryland, founded by the English in Virginia in 1634, was a relatively successful settlement as they accommodated the Native Indians to a greater extent than the English in the Chesapeake, who had not formed a good relationship with them. However, both England and Spain westernised the Indians, with alcohol, guns and ammunition. Moreover, both were notorious for brutalising and terrorising the Indians. As Taylor surmises, the English promoters of migration depicted the Spanish as 'uniquely brutal colonizers... the Indians of Virginia would welcome the English as their liberators'. On the other hand, 'the Cusabo welcomed the English...as a welcome alternative to ineffectual Spanish' Such differences are emphasised by Taylor: 'the Spanish were uniquely more cruel and far more brutal and destructive than other Europeans in their treatment of the Indians' Furthermore, with regard to the concept of converting the Indians to Christianity through missionaries, 'the English refusal to convert slaves diverged sharply from the practice of the... Spanish... masters." Their foremost concern was to assimilate them as economic inferiors. Overall, the English and Spanish settlements shared the overwhelming similarity that they both desired to keep the Indians under control and thus 'the first and essential step was to oblige the mobile Indians to settle down in permanent and delimited communities." This had the additional benefit of making a greater expanse of land available for more settlements.
In addition to both settlements' government's attitude towards Indians, they also differed with regard to their own 'planter elite." 'The English monarch exercised little power over his colonists' On the other hand, Spanish colonies 'permitted neither elected neither assemblies nor individual liberties'
In the mid-seventeenth century English settlements were developing in the West Indies and became 'crown jewels of the English colonial empire' The escalating population of the West Indies highlighted their importance as settlements, for example, by 1650 more colonists lived there than the Chesapeake and New England settlements combined, totalling 44,000. By the early eighteenth century Jamaica had become 'the wealthiest and most important colony in the English empire." On the other hand, it was not until 1616 that English colonists discovered the wealth that could be wrought from tabacco plantations, long after the Spanish. Despite this, 'plantation settlements in... Virginia, or in parts of Spanish America... had more in common with each other than with the mother country'
Regarding the significance of the Lesser Antilles of the Caribbean, English and Spanish opinions differed considerably. The English viewed them as important due to their proximity to Spanish ports, whereas the Spanish 'disdained the islands as too small to bother with'
Taylor indicates how England was 'emerging as an important power as Spain grew weaker' However, this had significant repercussions as 'fugitive slaves fled the English colonies to establish themselves in St. Augustine' This represents the differences between the settlements and, moreover, the antagonism transpiring between them.
There is a remarkable distinction between migration to English and Spanish settlements as highlighted by Bailyn:
This is contested by Taylor who claims that, in the sixteenth century alone, there were 250,000 Spanish migrants in North America.
Since the populations of English settlements were demographically self-sustaining and thus growing continuously, increasingly more than the Spanish, their societies emerged within a more stratified and viable social and economic framework, which encouraged permanency. Alongside differences between European colonies, within each of their settlements 'communities differed... the distinctions among them, more than their similarities, shaped the ways in which new arrivals were absorbed into the society." As a result of their large and diverse population, English settlements were consistently more dynamic than the Spanish and, moreover, further developed as highlighted by their colonial expansion inland. At first, the English settlements were 'clustered on a coastal strip' These were initially English and Spanish settlements but by the mid-seventeenth century both were in English hands and were distinguishable from other regions because these settlements were convenient for Atlantic trade. Eventually, the 'English secured a lucrative, dynamic, and expansive base on the North American continent' On the other hand, in Spanish New Mexico imports were only allowed through Vera Cruz, which resulted in economic stagnation.
In conclusion, the early English and Spanish settlements in North America shared both similarities and differences in terms of their trade, demographical structures, religious beliefs, their nature towards Native Indians and their geographical location. Although some of these similarities and differences were implicit, many were explicit, as seen specifically with regard to their purpose and religion.