Following his inauguration as President of the United States, on 4 March 1933, Franklin D. Roosevelt commenced with putting his New Deal policy into effect. This unique programme of legislation was formulated in response to the Great Depression, during which the nation had plummeted into a situation of inconceivable destitution and despair, as a catastrophic repercussion of the Wall Street Crash on 29 October 1929.
The evaluation of the New Deal, in retrospect, raises questions not only of its short-term success, regarding whether it achieved its ultimate objective of lifting the country out of depression, but also of its long-term impact on the United States. This evaluation is synonymous with the debate on whether the New Deal was 'revolutionary or evolutionary'
It is essential to consider the provenance of studies on the success of the New Deal, specifically including the personal background of historians. For instance, historians who endured the Great Depression, and thus directly experienced the effects of the New Deal, may be 'tinged with a pinch of compassion'
Interpretations of the New Deal, and its success, diverge between right and left wing classifications, the latter continuing to dominate its historiography. Left wing historians, such as Barton Bernstein More positively, centre-left historians, for example William Leuchtenburg At the other end of the historiographical spectrum, those from the right wing school, including Robert Higgs Within this range of interpretations there is not an absolute denial that the New Deal was successful to a certain extent in its preliminary achievements, however there exist discrepancies concerning the degree of its long-term impact.
The Great Depression signified an unforeseen departure from the earlier prosperity of the decade and left the United States in a state of emergency. The explicit purpose of the New Deal was as a response to this situation, thus its success should be measured according to the extent to which it brought the country out of depression and stimulated the economy, by presenting an overview of its chief policies.
The epoch of the New Deal is divided into two distinctive phases, the First and Second, in accordance with the objective of its policies; namely relief, recovery and reform.
The First New Deal, spanning the period 1933 to 1935, specifically focused upon relief and recovery: 'the tremendous emergency of the depression had produced an insistence that government undertake the tasks of unemployment relief and economic recovery." In the whirlwind of the first 'Hundred Days' Roosevelt created a plethora of 'Alphabet Agencies'
Early relief campaigns to provide shelter and food were combined with policies of recovery, commencing with the Emergency Banking Act (Glass-Steagall Act) in March 1933. This succeeded in restoring the nation's confidence in the financial system by proving the solvency of banks and ensuring the security of money deposited in them, persuading people to utilise them again.
The National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA) became law, in 1933, with the intention of remedying the dire situation of unemployment and industrial disorganisation, and has been labelled 'the governments most elaborate scheme to revive industry." Its success depended on the supplementary agencies that it established for designated purposes: the Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA), the Public Works Administration (PWA) and the National Recovery Administration (NRA). These were key components of the New Deal and 'welding these different elements together was a triumph'
The New Deals agricultural programme, commanded by the AAA, benefited farmers by However, its success is lessened because it diminished farmers' entrepreneurial independence, and it did not have an immense effect on the economy as a whole. The Resettlement Administration, of 1935, subsequently proposed
The PWA was the most successful division of the NIRA, formed to pump state funds into construction works schemes, of which there existed over thirty thousand, in the hope of stimulating industry. The PWA was somewhat successful in its attempts to bring the country out of depression, by creating an influx of work for millions of starving people, although it did not equal pre-depression levels of employment. The majority of PWA projects led to the erection of structures that stood as marked successes of the New Deal, for example 'bridges...schools, and hospitals' Furthermore, workers retained their skills, which afforded them increased job opportunities in the future.
Although initially considered the keystone of Roosevelt's New Deal programme, the NRA 'became an object of great controversy after the initial flush of enthusiasm' United States. The success of the NRA dwindled as a result of its over-zealous attempts to regulate all areas of business, as opposed to concentrating its efforts on major industry. Hence, it did not succeed in its efforts to stimulate demand and arguably brought the United States closer to socialism, by allowing Presidential intervention in commerce. Nevertheless, the social reforms promoted by the NRA, for fixed minimum wages and shorter working hours, must not be undervalued.
Another successful aspect of the New Deal was the 'most admired' The prime focus was upon young male victims of the depression, of whom the CCC had employed 250,000 The work of these youths in forestry, flood control and fire prevention, highlights the success of the New Deal in both soaking up excessive numbers of unemployed alongside improving the self-esteem of the younger generation.
The Tennessee Valley Authority, of May 1933, generated work among farmers, in programmes aimed at reactivating regional hydroelectric power via the construction of dams, in addition to controlling flood problems along the Mississippi tributary system. It was 'maybe in the long run its most fruitful innovation'
The Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA) was also established in 1933, under the leadership of Harry Hopkins, for managing the provision of direct relief in the form of grants to badly affected states, and was debatably another 'of the most successful parts of the New Deal." Most of the achievements of FERA stemmed from its auxiliary organisation, the Civil Works Administration. The objective of this relief organisation was to provide work for those deemed unemployable by absorbing them into state projects, and it largely succeeded in giving assistance to 'those who had lived on the margins of poverty.'
As the decade progressed, and the immediate dilemma of unemployment and destitution had been confronted, the Second New Deal emerged, in 1935. Its continuation was aided by Roosevelt's landslide victory in the 1936 Presidential elections, clearly implying that 'the verdict of the American people on the New Deal at the time was overwhelming approval'
This second phase ventured forward opportunistically with a more radical 'reform conscious' Although the WPA was crucial in generating even more jobs, it is the latter that has been described as 'the most significant symbol of the entire New Deal' The social security system is emblematic of the New Deal as it is still present in the United States today, although now encompasses a greater selection of the population, such as teachers and farm labourers, who were excluded at the outset.
Notwithstanding its successes, this second phase was judged as 'vulnerable' It has also been postulated that it 'represented a false smoke screen...a permanent rejection of real planning'
The precipitous recession of the economy in 1937 was a deeply intensifying factor in the disillusionment of the New Deal. The significant impact upon state of employment, which remained at an intolerable level of ten million in 1939 Furthermore, 'the one-third ill-fed and ill-housed and the two-thirds alienated and desperate, still existed, in spite off the New Deal and in spite of all that welfare." The ultimate failure of the New Deal in its endeavours to 'lift the nation entirely out of depression'
However, it is significant that the New Dealers appreciated that they had 'only come part of the way' Despite the fact that Roosevelt's solutions were incomplete, it is justified by Schlesinger that 'all great problems are insoluble'
Although the depression had petered out by 1938, it confirmed that 'the New Deal had not yet mastered economic cycles' Furthermore, a spiralling national debt of three hundred billion dollars Davies goes to extremes with his radical claim that 'there is nothing the New Deal has done... that could not have been done better by an earthquake'
Only with the armaments boom of World War II did the United States secure full employment and restore prosperity. On the other hand, it is 'conceivable that New Deal measures would have led the country into a new cycle of prosperity even if there had been no war'
Although it is believed that the New Deal recognised underrepresented minorities, such as Negroes, Conkin contends that they 'remained a submerged and neglected caste' It is important to identify that the successes of the New Deal did not always apply proportionately across the social spectrum.
Nevertheless, 'the shortcomings of the New Deal vanish in the general perspective of its supreme success' It had 'performed its necessary tasks well' Furthermore, the New Deal was adventitiously successful in restoring American confidence and reviving faith in democracy, the banking system, and the economy.
In the long-term, the New Deal marked an era in which the President, for the first time in the history of American reform movements, 'took the reins of government' The 'prestige...power'
Moreover, a form of 'subsidised, regulated welfare capitalism still stands...as the core of American domestic politics' Essentially, the New Deal 'did initiate changes that led to long run success' Its accomplishments are thus 'still and essential part of the fabric of American society today.'
In conclusion, Roosevelt's New Deal did a 'remarkable job of handling an emergency of tremendous magnitude with no previous experience whatsoever." Although it did not immediately succeed its objective of lifting the nation out of the Great Depression, this does not diminish the role of the reform agencies nor the long-term successes upon the United States, both politically and socially.
Conkin wonderfully and succinctly reviews the course of the New Deal: 'the New Deal solved a few problems, ameliorated a few more, obscured many, and created new ones...only with trepidation will the student of history try to sum up the results of the New Deal.'