The racial and economic factors, which were the principal contributors to the enslavement of Africans in colonial North America, are intertwined in a complex relationship as they overlap considerably.
The function of racism in enslavement This has been a hotly contested topic on which there has been such extensive indecision and disagreement that a firm conclusion is unlikely to be arrived at.
Consequently, this has played a role in the rise of enquiries concerning the precise
These two separate debates are central to discussions on the enslavement of Africans in colonial North America, in relation to its racial and economic origins, and thus in ascertaining the most significant causal factor.
Economic factors were of indisputable importance in the enslavement of Africans in colonial North America. 'Progressivism'
As stressed by Winthrop D. Jordan, 'it may be taken as given that there would have been no enslavement without economic need." Such economic necessities in North America included, most importantly, an overwhelming requirement for agricultural labour as a result of the 'high land-to-population ratio." This was specifically true of the plantations of the underpopulated colonies that, in a quest to maximise their profits, desired to take advantage of the opportunities offered by escalating European demand. They 'called for some sort of bound, controlled labour' Peter Kolchin argues firmly that 'shortage of labour
The familiarity of Africans with the rice crop, as cultivated in their homeland, was of significant interest to North American colonists who wanted to establish it as a staple crop. The prior knowledge that Africans bought with them across the Atlantic would aid the economy and thus was an additional incitement for their enslavement. 'This would help to explain the joint growth of slavery and rice production in South Carolina between the 1690s and 1720s' However, it must be taken into account, as has been noted by Philip D. Morgan Therefore, the economic advantage of having Africans with existing skills of rice cultivation could However, if it were the case that such skills were versatile and could be transferred to another area of cultivation, such as cotton or tobacco, then African slaves would still be economically advantageous.
On the other hand, 'the Atlantic slave trade cannot be explained by the demand for these crops' The importation of eighty percent of all slaves was carried out between 1451 and 1810. This is particularly true of New England where there did not exist a staple crop that required such an economic need and 'compelling demand for Negroes' Even though this has been viewed as merely 'weakly rooted' In an explicit contrast, in Virginia and Maryland slavery became a 'vitally important institution' A further example of regional disparity is seen in the fact that 'slavery became the backbone of the economies in some colonies while in others it made little or no advance." It can be inferred, therefore, that slavery existed in some areas where there had
In comparison to the exigencies of the cotton crop, there was ever-increasing demand for tobacco and hence for labour, which was to be infinitely available, 'cheap but not temporary, mobile but not independent, and tireless rather than skilled." This contributed to the enslavement of Africans who adequately fulfilled such criteria, although slaves on tobacco plantations only accounted for a 'miniscule fraction of the six million slave imports during the same period." Therefore, it can be surmised that they were being Nevertheless, economic motives still prevailed as it was the sugar plantations, producing the most popular consumable in Europe from colonial America, which soaked up between sixty and seventy percent This underlines the role of major features of the economy in enslavement. It is apparent that, having begun to move away from the declining labour of Indians and white indentured servants, 'the eventual solution to the supply for North American plantations lay via the Atlantic slave trade'
The relationship between Even though the view that 'the roots of slavery are found in capitalism' It was the expanding desire of colonies in North America to accumulate wealth through the exportation of staples, which required the labour of ever-more people, namely Africans. Their diversity also enabled these slaves to be used in industrial work. The development of North America with the export of manufactured goods, in the nineteenth century, was primarily owing to the toils of enslaved Africans. George Fredrickson It has been suggested that 'Negroes were relatively helpless in the face of European aggressiveness and technology'
Thus economic factors, comprising of labour requirements, managing demand, diverse transferable skills, and increased capital, reflect that 'American Negro slavery was created for expressly economic purposes.'
On the other hand, the controversy over the origins of slavery has 'elicited much new consideration' The development involved the incorporation of a new element into the debate on slavery, where 'the burden of proof rests with... those who suggest racial rather than economic foundations." This added a complex dimension and a 'racial twist... to what is basically an economic phenomenon." It was Carl Degler whom first challenged this orthodox economic interpretation of slavery. He suggested that 'the American idea of the racial inferiority of Africans has roots deeper than the labour needs of early colonists' This theory carries with it his proposal that racial prejudice and discrimination came The Handlins' strongly argue the case of the latter, citing that chattel slavery was established long after the original arrival of Africans who were, at first, indentured servants. This ensued in heated conflicts with Degler, who maintained 'that racism existed from the moment that blacks stepped ashore." On the other hand, Jordan takes the safer middle-road with his view that 'the two probably evolved at the same time' Plumb asserts that 'racism is merely a justification for slavery'
'Something about Negroes... set them apart for drastic exploitation, oppression, and degradation." It is evident that Africans were rendered different from Europeans due to their differences such as their physiognomy, level of civilisation, religion, strange language, and skin colour. This caused exhibitions of racism against Africans.
Englishmen were predisposed to stereotype blackness with disdainful and negative connotations such as Satan, savagery, barbarism, magic and heathenism, even prior to their first contact with Africans. They carried these attitudes across the Atlantic, which then combined with early examples of 'ethnocentrism and xenophobia' Therefore, when the This instigated the debasement of Africans as slaves in an attempt to control, subordinate and dehumanise them, which is a highly illuminating example of racism. It is inferable that, due to the
Also, 'various passages in Scripture condoned the existence of slave societies' Furthermore, their lack of moral consciousness was a result of the accepted belief in the inferiority of Africans because of their skin-colour. There was undoubtedly a 'causal connection between the institution of slavery and the colour prejudice of Americans'
On the other hand, Kenneth Stampp has 'noted that there was no prejudice or racial discrimination against the African before he was enslaved." Such a surmise is comparable to the Handlins', which harps back to the unsolved chicken-or-egg dispute of which came first. In relation to this, an important question has been put forward: 'Does the mere fact that racism existed prior to slavery prove that racism caused the institution?" The implication is that, even though racism existed, it may not have necessarily been the only influence on the enslavement of Africans, although it was undoubtedly a contributory factor of enslavement:
The many different and conflicting views postulated regarding the role of racism as a factor must be taken into equal consideration, including the opinion that 'racism does not create slavery. It is an excuse for it." This proposes that racism played its role as a
To conclude, there was a multiplicity of factors, both economic and racial, which led to the enslavement of Africans in colonial North America. Many historians argue for either one or the other, such as Williams who firmly states that 'the reason was economic not racial' However, it can be contended that it was neither of these factors Although it was largely economic requirements that instigated the need for extra plantation workers, it was only as a result of already engrained racial prejudices regarding Africans that it was they, in particular, whom were considered appropriate candidates as slaves for the colonies of North America.