Diverse scholarly debates have transpired throughout the twentieth century regarding the dependence of Britain's commercial empire on slavery. Although these debates tended to be sporadic, they had the intensity 'to leave a strong resonance in the historiography of the subject', and thus influence modern discourse. Although recent debates, such as Kenneth Morgan's, 'inexplicitly link the contribution of slavery...to British economic development in the eighteenth-century' a general consensus has yet to be reached regarding the significance of this relationship.
Economic historians, such as Martin Daunton, are not generally predisposed to considering the implications of slavery on Britain's commercial empire. Accordingly, vastly differing interpretations among economic and social historians has resulted in a 'large historical literature made up of many incommensurate studies." Consequently, it has been proposed that,
Eric Williams was the first historian to fully analyse the relationship between the 'Caribbean slave-sugar nexus and metropolitan economic development." His seminal work, Capitalism and Slavery
, was ambitious; it was published in the mid-twentieth-century when a largely Eurocentric approach was adopted in historical writing and Africa and the Caribbean were marginalised as the periphery. Williams, influenced by Karl Marx's concepts of capitalism, highlighted the crucial role of slavery, and the profits it generated, as the fulcrum of Britain's commercial success. Williams 'made it impossible for historians to discuss British economic development without consideration of slavery', as he drew attention to Britain's dependence upon the institution.
However, after the Second World War, Williams' work was challenged because of its narrow analysis within the geographical context of the Caribbean. Furthermore, his profit thesis was not fully incorporative; Joseph Inikori highlights that 'profits from the employment of enslaved Africans to produce export commodities' are excluded, thus it is not sufficiently detailed. Nevertheless, Williams' thesis remains crucial to our understanding as no prior historian valued Britain's dependence on slavery.
The slave trade 'brought the continents of Europe, Africa and America together in a commercial relationship', which was crucial in stimulating Britain's empire because it garnered profits in a continuous trading process. The triangular trade involved vessels leaving Britain with manufactured goods to be exchanged for slaves in Western Africa, who were traded on American and Caribbean plantations for slave-produced commodities, such as sugar, which were transported back to Britain. However, the triangular trade has aroused scepticism as it was more complex than ordinarily depicted. As opposed to the entire journey being made by one ship and crew, it has been proposed there was a different fleet for each leg of the journey. A continuous journey would not have been financially viable, as it would have taken a long period of time before the ship returned to Britain with the desired commodities.
The value of the Atlantic trading complex increased dramatically as the British slave trade flourished in the late seventeenth- and early eighteenth-centuries, and shipments of enslaved Africans escalated. Between 1720 and 1730 the British carried around one-hundred thousand slaves from the West African coast to the Americas, with Bristol surpassing London as the main slave port during this decade. Although evidence varies with regard to the numbers of slaves shipped to America, somewhere between fifteen and twenty million slaves were exported in total which would undoubtedly have significant repercussions on Britain's commercial empire in terms of quantities of slave-produced commodities.
When considering the extent to which Britain's commercial empire depended on slavery, it is important to reflect upon the following questions, posed by Kenneth Morgan:
It has long been the universally accepted wisdom that slavery was extremely profitable for Britain and her commercial empire, as it facilitated capital accumulation that stimulated the economy. However, since the late eighteenth-century, historians have disagreed about the level of profitability slavery generated for Britain's commercial empire. Williams claimed that 'profits of one-hundred percent were not uncommon in Liverpool, and one voyage netted a clear profit of at least three-hundred percent." Yet, since Williams' research, extra primary material has been accumulated and progress has been made in qualitative techniques. Accordingly, Morgan has asserted that it is 'no longer accurate to state that the profits of the slave trade were consistently high: annual net returns in the trade were relatively modest', often because of the need to offset costs.
In 1700, when the slave trade was at its peak, its profits only made a small contribution to Britain's financial sphere, composing only 0.0054 percent of the national income. In contrast, it has been estimated that the contribution of the profits of slavery to Britain's capital formation 'ranged from 2.4 percent to 10.8 percent between 1686 and 1720." The dependence of Britain's commercial empire on slavery can be determined by considering whether these profits were large enough to make a substantial impact upon commercial investment. Edward Reynolds has surmised that 'profits from the slave trade...provided one of the main streams for the accumulation of capital in England that financed the Industrial Revolution." In addition, profits of the slave trade financed James Watt and his innovative steam engine. Thus, Britain's commercial empire depended to a significant extent on the financial benefits accrued from slavery, even though some evidence suggests that profits were modest.
The image of a world system whereby the 'wealth generated in the 'periphery' (i.e. the colonies) became a vital source for capital accumulation in the 'core' (i.e. the metropolitan centre of empire)', has been attacked. Patrick O'Brien proposes that profits generated within the periphery were not sufficient to finance a significant proportion of investment expenditures during the Industrial Revolution. His overpowering conclusion was that 'for the economic growth of the core, the periphery was peripheral." Yet, William's considers the colonies 'the darlings of the empire, the most precious jewels in the British diadem' accentuating her dependence on them.
Britain relied heavily upon the import and export of slave-produced commodities. British exports grew dramatically at the end of the eighteenth-century, and exports to Africa doubled over the century. England's domestic exports increased from 4.5 million to 18.2 million between 1700 and 1798, and her imports grew from 5.8 million to 23.9 million in the same period. British slave economies were responsible for a substantial percentage of this trading, stimulated by an ever-increasing consumer demand for tropical commodities such as coffee, tobacco and sugar. The slave-sugar nexus enhanced Britain's commercial empire as consumption of sugar increased dramatically during the eighteenth-century. Conversely, 'arguments for slavery and sugar's role in metropolitan capital accumulation have not proven that the direct connection between the two was substantial', and it has been deemed too small scale to furnish a sufficient contribution to the commercial empire.
However, raw materials from slave plantations were vital as they encouraged new and valuable industries, providing a stimulus to textile, metalware and hardware manufacturing. Even though Morgan postulates that 'most industries did not depend upon imported raw materials', many subsidiary trades relied upon such imports, such as the cotton industry in Manchester and the wool industry in Exeter. In the early eighteenth-century 'England depended on the West Indian islands for between two-thirds and three-quarters of its raw cotton', highlighting how fundamental slavery was for the commercial empire. By 1750 there was 'hardly a trading or a manufacturing town in England which was not in some way connected with the triangular or direct colonial trade', signifying the widespread ramifications of slavery on Britain.
Yet there exist problems examining the flow of funds from the slave trade into the British economy. Although the financial rewards accruing from slavery appear impressive, most profits went to independent merchants; private fortunes garnered from plantations did not inevitably contribute to Britain's commercial empire. In 1770, Adam Smith emphasised that 'profits...filled the coffers of certain interest groups such as merchants and planters but did not benefit the economy as a whole', as the wealth generated from slavery was not funnelled directly back to Britain.
Britain's dependence on slavery can be seen in the pursuit of a protectionist market, with the introduction of the Navigation Acts in the late seventeenth-century, to ensure that she dominated the slave trade. These Acts declared that the products of slavery could only be carried to the motherland on British-owned British-manned ships, and colonies could only purchase British commodities or those that had been taken there first. Britain's commercial empire depended upon the ability to re-export slave-produced products to Europe, and her shipping and carrying trades flourished as a result. Although modern history on shipping is somewhat indecisive, it is likely that the slave economy was the 'main driving force behind the growth of English shipping and ship building trades' during this era. The indirect impact of slavery on the provision of work for shipbuilders, merchants, customs officers and entrepreneurs is important in assessing the dependence on slavery. Underemployment characterised eighteenth-century Britain, hence it proves difficult to see how else her commercial empire would have progressed without the impact slavery had upon employment levels.
The evolution of financial institutions also constituted an important part of Britain's commercial empire. Mainstream institutions were often directly associated with slavery, because of the benefits their founders had amassed. A successful slave-trading family in Liverpool set up the Heywood Bank in 1773; tobacco lords in Glasgow established The Ship Bank and the Glasgow Arms in 1753; and insurance companies were born of the ranks of sugar refiners.
However, 'it must not be inferred that the triangular trade was solely and entirely responsible for...economic development." Britain's commercial empire depended upon a variety of factors, and such endogenous factors must not be underestimated. For example, Britain was highly dependent on her internal market, alongside profits from agriculture and industry, to generate capital and act as the mainspring of commercial growth. Increasing consumer demand for domestic manufactured goods was indispensable and, as middle-range incomes rose and the price of commodities fell, Britain's commercial empire benefited immensely. Furthermore taxation, by the way of customs and excise duties as well as indirect taxes on luxuries, was substantial and without it
Yet this highlights that other factors were often linked to slavery, even if indirectly, and 'economic historians have disagreed over the precise interrelationship of the various economic factors involved.'
In conclusion, slavery constituted an essential quantitative and qualitative stimulus to Britain's economy as a whole; 'the colonial system was the spinal cord of the commercial capitalism of the mercantile epoch' of the eighteenth-century. Enslaved labour sustained Britain's commercial empire because it made possible large-scale specialised production of commodities, which drove commerce;
It is difficult to envisage another path that would have carried Britain's commercial empire to the level it attained by the end of the eighteenth-century, emphasising dependence on slavery. It was slavery that 'made an important, though not decisive, impact on Britain's long term economic development...enabling Britain to become the workshop of the world." Atlantic commerce and the contribution of slaves lit the torch of Britain's Industrial Revolution;
Thus, Britain's commercial empire did depend on slavery in the eighteenth-century.