A new age of transportation commenced in 1830s America when the first railroad, from Baltimore to Ohio, went into operation following decades of agitation for an enhanced mode of transport. The revolutionary birth of the railroad was greeted with the 'enthusiastic consensus that railways were sublime and that they would help to unify, dignify, expand and enrich the nation', through the prosperity that would be garnered from increasing trade and development, which would be facilitated by the railroads dynamism. This new medium of transport did indeed have an immense impact on the nations' economy as it stimulated industry as well as agriculture, by enabling farmers to retail their crops in distance markets only accessible by railroad. However, it was not always a case of improvement as regional specialisation tended to occur, and thus many Americans experienced prosperity at the expense of others: 'it brought immediate economic disaster for some, feverish land speculation, and long term economic disaster for all.'
Yet negative economic views must not detract from the advantages of the railroad as its importance 'spilled over into countless other dimensions of American life', primarily the social and cultural spheres. The railroad transformed American life and culture dramatically and was vastly significant in generating popularity for the most renowned amusement resort in turn-of-the-century America, Atlantic City, which was situated at the northern tip of Absecon Island in New Jersey. However, it would only become so renowned as a result of the importance of the railroad, and thus its importance was crucial.
From the nineteenth century 'Americans began their long romance with the railroad' and were awed by its ever-increasing scale. Over thirty thousand miles of track were laid between 1830 and 1860, and by 1900 'the railroad had grown...to become the central channel of American life and commerce' with thirty-five thousand passenger cars in service. The railroad held the country together in an extensive interlinking web of over two hundred thousand miles of railroads as well as trans-continental lines.
The vast expanse of land covered by the railroads allowed for the transport of tourists en masse to resorts across different states, highlighting the importance of the railroad in generating widespread popularity for Atlantic City. As Benjamin McArthur highlights:
The completion of the Pennsylvania and Reading railroads, running between New York, Philadelphia and Atlantic City (*after the Civil War?*), was extremely significant in generating popularity of the resort as it enabled pleasure-seekers to travel there from a wide expanse of surrounding states, including Cleveland, Chicago, Detroit, Pittsburg, and even Canada. In 1873, 'nearly half a million people made the fifty-five mile trip from Philadelphia to Atlantic City', emphasising the importance of the railroad in generating popularity for the mass resort. Furthermore the bridge across the Delaware River, constructed by the Pennsylvania Road in the late 1880s, meant that railcars could avoid the transfer across Philadelphia. This allowed tourists to travel a more direct route to Atlantic City and cut down travel time and expenses, generating further popularity for the resort especially among the less well off. The railroad was thus an indispensable means of delivering people to this seaside resort, and it would not have grown so popular without the railroad, as there would not have been the same level of accessibility thus would not have had the vast numbers of visitors. As M. D. Youngman asserts: 'As to the means of reaching Atlantic City the directions are extremely simple...-'Apply at any railroad ticket office.'' Accordingly the popularity of Atlantic City became nationwide, as people across the country were able to travel there by this advanced means of transportation.
The public imagination was captured by the railroad. It possessed an irresistible appeal for the majority of the population as it gave them the opportunity to experience greater things, such as the enjoyment of the distant seaside resort of Atlantic City. The importance of the railroad in generating popularity for this resort can be seen because it 'opened the...great sequoias of tourism' by encouraging low fared excursions. Furthermore, the 'railroad - the very means of transport which made tourism on a large scale possible - [was itself] exciting to watch', because it was something new and elating. The railroad had an overwhelming physical presence in daily life and Americans found it 'thrilling, and proved passionately fond of everything connected with it', including Atlantic City, yet they were more interested in their own experience than concerning themselves with the economic and labour implications of the railroad.
Many Americans, ranging across the social spectrum, saw the railroads as a magical wonder. They rode them for the novelty sensation of the experience, revelling in exhilaration at the panoramic vistas of the natural world they observed as they passed through at great speeds. It was the sense of danger at the speed of the railcar that increased its appeal, and millions rode the railroads for mere recreational purposes. 'Such advances could not fail to increase human happiness' and the feeling of liberation felt at what was, then, the fastest passenger service in history. Therefore, the railroad can be considered a popular tourist attraction in itself and would have made travelling long distances, for example to Atlantic City, increasingly appealing because people would also have the experience of the journey.
However, railroad journeys, especially in its early stages, were not always comfortable as a result of the thunderous noise and heat of the engine, poor ventilation as well as hard seats and shuddering carriages. Some historians have asserted that:
Yet, as time passed, luxury railcars enhanced passenger comfort, with the Pullman Palace Car Company introducing sleeping cars. The improved comfort of railroad travel may have encouraged more Americans to embark upon long distance journeys to Atlantic City.
In Atlantic City itself the Sprague electric railway, commonly know as 'trolley cars' throughout America, stretched over eight miles and attracted a large number of tourists, especially those interested in electric traction. Frank Julian Sprague invented the system in the 1880s with the intention of cutting down pollution and providing a comfortable, cheap and speedy method of transport. The trolleys were immensely popular and in Atlantic City alone 6,464 separate trips were made in the first decade of its use.
Throughout the late nineteenth and early twentieth century 'Atlantic City reigned as the Queen of Resorts and the "national playground"' and attracted millions of people each year, the majority of whom were only able to be there as a result of the railroad. As Atlantic City could cater for up to one hundred and seventy-five thousand tourists at a time, alongside its permanent population of twenty-five thousand, it relied upon the deliverance of these large numbers of people via the railroad.
As more people visited Atlantic City, due to the railroad, it grew into a popular mass resort; with people being stimulated its invigorating climate, its pure white sandy beaches and lukewarm sea. Also, alongside these natural assets stood its impressive Boardwalk and rolling wicker chairs, amusement piers and dance pavilions, elegant restaurants and colossal hotels, such as the Malborough. In addition to its unique and wholesome atmosphere, the sheer luxury of the resort attracted vast crowds throughout the seasons. The railroad made it possible for people to escape the stifling summer heat of the city and soak up in the fresh and salty air of Atlantic City. It prevailed as an unrivalled resort, considered by many contemporaries as the 'finest watering place in the world." Amongst its social whirl of urban public space and symbolic mass culture, Atlantic City provided an array of spectacles and rides on its Steel Pier, including roller-coasters, the Tilt-a-Whirl, wild animal shows and its biggest attraction the Diving Horse. The dawning of a new age of technology in the late nineteenth century, as focused on by Leo Marx, also allowed for the use of lighting and mechanics to enhance shows and rides. The railroad enabled Americans from across the United States to experience these wonderful new attractions and the ruse of danger a number of them provided.
The popularity generated by the railroads had a distinctive class element, as many of the lower working-class were unable to afford to travel to Atlantic City, hence the resort was free of the objectionable 'rabble'. Charles Funnel, one of the keenest historians of Atlantic City, underlines that the ambience of the resort was largely for the lower middle-class and white-collar workers: 'the nouveaux bourgeois." The location of Atlantic City, and thus the significance of railroads, was important in this respect as it was within striking distance of 'all of the medium sized, industrial cities...and...attracted a distinct segment of the middle class." Tourists travelled great distances to Atlantic City to demonstrate their membership of a particular class and proclaim their identity as part of a consumer mass audience. The resort was therefore popular as it provided those who could afford it with an escape from ordinary consciousness and the harsh realities and drudgeries of working life:
Atlantic City's popularity was largely derived from the public illusion it created of upward social mobility. It allowed people to be seen as better than they actually were in a public demonstration of their personal success in making it into the middle class: 'families came to Atlantic City not to fade into the background, but to see and be seen, to show of that they had made it in America." Segregation was a vital factor in this 'levelling up' spectacle as the lower middle classes not only had to act rich, but had to ensure that others were stepped over and held down: 'both things had to happen for the fantasy to work.'
The Boardwalk was the pinnacle of Atlantic City, described by contemporaries as 'the eight wonder of the world'** and enduring as the vision of American utopia. The Boardwalk was the idea of hotel-owner Jacob Keim and railroad conductor, Alexander Boardman and it was to become:
The Boardwalk was a formal and exclusive arena that allowed tourists the occasion to imitate the upper class by showing off in their finest apparel, exuding respectability and decorum: 'pretending to be rich was a virtual requirement, the ticket for admission." They would act out the American dream of upward mobility, whilst seated on a rolling chair that was being pushed by a black man. Atlantic City would remain the most popular mass resort in America all the time that it was able to stage this fantasy of racial dominance of the imagined well-to-do.
In conclusion, it was not the railroad alone that generated the popularity of Atlantic City, as the resort was successful in creating popularity through its attractions. However, although it had the means of enticing vast swathes of the population to go, they required the means to transport them there, thus it would not have developed into the popular mass resort that it did as without the importance of the railroad. Although Atlantic City faded into the past when Disneyland opened in July 1955, it cannot be denied that in early twentieth century Atlantic City, with its 'sweep of colour...riot of sound and chaos of movement, it's ribbons of rolling chairs, towering hotels, noisy amusement piers, and armies of people, was a mass resort." The importance of the railroad in this process is unequalled and without it Atlantic City would not have thrived as it did as the most popular mass resort in America.