Breaking formally with Spain in 1821, postcolonial Peru would witness significant changes in the state's approach to its indigenous majority and the "Indian problem". Influenced by the core ideals of Despite the liberal republican discourse fuelling a modernising drive, Indians were routinely contained along established lines of "paternalistic exploitation" While elite interests lobbied for power, the desire to erode communal landholdings and penetrate the Andean interior would inflame civil tensions. Coinciding with the consolidation of liberal control in the 1870s, local rebellions became increasingly more frequent, their characteristics and intensity reflecting the interplay of regionally-specific geographic and socio-economic conditions. Broadly speaking, the War of the Pacific (1879-84) would precipitate greater peasant organisation, and nourish disenchantment with a national project that undermined basic rights. Though these developments implied a marked growth in Indians' conception of the nation, prevailing Creole interpretation came to belittle such protest, returning to lament the problem of a backward, unassimilated peasant majority.
In the immediate period preceding independence, the Peruvian State sought to modernise its relationship to its indigenous subjects by repealing the tribute system in 1810. Though Peru had declared its separation from the peninsula in 1821 - one of the last of the South American colonies to do so - the Royalist cause would not be entirely undone until the defeat of the remaining Spanish forces some three years later at Ayacucho. Far from imbuing the nation's leadership with confidence however, this mobilisation incited Creole fears of latent peasant uprising. Although Indian involvement in independence aroused hopes widespread faith in the nation-state,
While acquiring a republican gloss, the assault on provincial power was nevertheless in many respects a continuation of colonial attempts to erode the authority of the In general, Creole distaste for the Indian was manifold, rejecting the preference for ostensibly inferior indigenous tongues such as Quechua over Spanish, superstitious syncretic Catholic practises, and an apparently innate aversion to private property and enterprise. Despite the optimistic proclamations of revolutionary leaders, the geographical and ideological gulf between the capital and hinterlands remained great,
In an era in which Enlightenment principles of liberty, equality, and citizenship featured strongly, the divisions created by ethno-cultural, economic, and class differences proved problematic to a state model seeking to increase its sovereignty. Geographically, the nation comprised three distinct areas: a "desert-like" pacific coast, the mountainous Andean range, and a set of low tropical valleys in the eastern Amazon basin. Ethnic heterogeneity further eroded a sense of universality; both in terms of internal distinctions between indigenous groups and divisions along caste lines of white, With the indigenous bulk of this population scattered across the vast central highlands, Indian communities remained fragmented sites of ethnic, cultural, and linguistic diversity stretching back beyond pre-conquest times. While they acknowledged, and would often rebel against, an overbearing national authority, individual Indian communities did not at this stage project a sense of solidarity with one another, much less an idea of the nation as a whole.
Though burgeoning in a political climate rich in republican ideals, integrationist approaches to the Indian majority initially took something of a backseat as different interests lobbied for power. In cementing control of the government, church, army, education, and commerce, conservative interests would essentially dominate. In any case, a degree of merging of conservative and liberal thought transpired in the late 1820s, reflecting fears of the insurrectionary potential of the interior and a consequent preoccupation with securing law and discipline. Though prominent conservatives would dismiss
Elite aversion to mobilised clans aside, these groups can commonly be regarded as exhibiting political consciousness, both in terms of demonstrating demands of the state and reacting to those identified as opposition. Following San Mart Of central importance was the payment of a 'contribution' to the state treasury, usurping the As the historian Mark Thurner elucidates, citizenship also progressively entailed taking unremunerated community posts, and participation in both public works labour and a newly conceived "labor brigade service".
Though this ambitious construction of a postcolonial nation implied commitment to an inclusive political system, the sense of two polarized worlds provided by the legacy of the dual Profoundly concerned with securing national progress, Creole ideology's overriding view of a disparate indigenous mass thus became that of an obstacle to be overcome, with competing lines of debate revolving around the imperative drive towards modernity. With the
In spite then of the progressive slant of elite discourse, the postcolonial system essentially upheld a reworked paradigm of paternalistic exploitation rooted in local authority. Equally, the state saw fit to increase the numbers employed within the temporal In usurping the last vestiges of the Inca nobility, As the historian V Following the influx of these new external officials, the power and position of the
Given the strength of regional ethnic ties however, this is not to credit the authorities with attaining a precipitous penetration of the highlands, as the void between Creole and Indian worlds remained considerable. In seeking to undermine local cultures, integrationist efforts would inadvertently bridge the cultural and economic dimensions of Indians' existing grievances, intensifying chagrin and inclination towards revolt. The endorsements of progressive liberal ideology notwithstanding, the issue of achieving an efficacious form of centralised state control would prove as elusive for republican officials as it had their Spanish predecessors. Despite the Bolivarian rhetoric, a boom within the guano nitrate export sector would irrigate the coast, effectively stalling elite concerns for the interior. Growing rich from this burgeoning economic activity in the period 1830-60, the elite developed indifference towards the nation's founding republican spirit.
In practical terms, the substantial revenues afforded by the boom eroded the economic incentive to further collection of the "indigenous contribution", diverting attention away from tackling the state-sierra gulf. In much the same vein, political weakness and the prosperity of the guano sector would combine to facilitate the rise of a militaristic Just as the government's ability to curb the regional supremacy of any one individual or set of interests depended on proximity to state power, Indian appreciation and engagement with national development bore direct correlation to communities' geographical dispersion. Though they would participate in civil unrest and challenge both metropolitan and rural efforts to exact greater money and enhance authority, the Indian worldview remained orientated towards the community and existing local ties, with little regard for a government project of citizenship.
Ascending to the presidency in 1829, Agust Much like the Buenos Aires Governor Juan Manuel de Rosas during Argentina's formative years, Gamarra typified the archetypal military While echoing much of the contemporary liberal sentiment, the dictator's political dealings were guided by a calculated conservatism designed to consolidate his position. Though heavily reliant on indigenous support, the president's implementation of conscription during a time of intense civil strife represented a concerted aim to develop a militarised hierarchy as a means to secure power.
Unable to neutralise sufficiently a turbulent political climate, Gamarra lost his power in 1833 as competing figures struggled for an effective base around which to cement their authority. The next four years saw an equivalent number of presidents, as forces headed Pedro Pablo Berm Gamarra would nonetheless return to the presidency in 1838, profiting from an "elitist and authoritarian form of nationalism" heralded by the disbanding of the Bolivia-Peru Confederacy, and reigning President Andr Much in the same way that the guano export boom diverted concerns away from the country's interior, an elite set of self-aggrandising tenets would effectively bolster the conservative hold on the country.
Although it was to be somewhat reworked in succeeding years, the creation and support of an empowered aristocracy as an efficacious model of progress and stability was to achieve a significant ideological legacy. Its contradiction of the nation's republican spirit notwithstanding, such an intellectual current would greatly influence much of the elite's attitude to governance in future years. While components of the liberal contingent lauded a "Liberal Revolution" in 1854 under Castilla, the renewed Bolivarian effort encountered significant obstacles from broad sections of the ruling class that were loath to jeopardise a stratified hierarchy. Efforts to alter the
Though it is relevant to speak of competition between liberal and conservative currents, this is not to claim that specific individuals or factions need necessarily embody such notions in their entirety. In the desire to articulate a pertinent vision for national advance, much of the ruling class would champion a mixed and at times contradictory bag of liberal and conservative ideology. Going against the Enlightenment emphasis on equality and individual liberty, much of Peru's social development would prove to bolster the existing social structure. As the historian Cecilia M
This dominant approach would greatly undermine state-sierra relations and the ostensible endeavour to advance control over the highlands, further inhibiting the government's understanding of the Indian worldview. While a resurgent Bolivarian spirit appeared to strengthen by the time of the 1870s, liberalism would in the second half of the nineteenth century lose much of its popular fa Owing to the slump in guano prosperity, the authorities were compelled to address more avidly the issue of maintenance of state revenue, leading President Mariano Ignacio Prado to restore the head tax in 1868. In furthering the assault on communal landholdings and reaffirming egalitarian ideals, such a piece of legislature was naturally consistent with the prevailing liberal republican discourse. In its financial implications however, this act proved at odds with the drive to modernise and challenge the communal existence of its peasant majority, as it plunged individuals into further financial difficulties and heightened their reliance on the community.
In essence, the existing Rebellions such as that of Huancan
While the elite lamented Indian backwardness, broad sections of the indigenous majority were becoming progressively more apt to challenge objectionable government action. Through denouncing power abuses, revolting Indians, just as they had done during colonial uprisings and rebellions, readily displayed a political consciousness and sense of mistreatment, a consciousness that manifested itself in their petitioning of regional Given the high illiteracy among Andean peasants, their view of such development remains confined to oral history and the contemporary observations of whites and
On a national level, the escalation of protest bore direct relation to the abolition of tribute outlined in the 1854 legislation. For the Indian masses accustomed to communal social arrangements, the imposition of fees for an entire range of natural commodities such as firewood and grazing space for cattle was exasperating. Just as Creole rhetoric would deride Indians' apparent ineptitude, dispersed communities were incapable of comprehending Lima's progressive model. No longer able to subsidise municipal authority as during the guano boom, the creation of a poll tax levied on each citizen was identified as the sole means of revitalising governmental coffers. This in effect entailed a decentralisation of state authority, which in insisting citizens pay the provincial government, as opposed to the national treasury, served to jeopardise the peasantry's interaction with the republican authorities. Broadly speaking, this heightened scope for Accordingly, a sense of contributing directly to the
That the state would confront more frequent, intense incidents of rebellion at this time had much to do with the war's impact on the peasantry. Following Peru's refusal to declare neutrality in a conflict between Bolivia and Chile over nitrate deposits in the Atacama Desert, the government became forced to confront the deleterious incursions of a foreign invader. In much of the central sierra, the rise of bands of With political authority crumbling across the highland range, merchants and landowners in central areas such as Colca and Acostambo opted to abandon their homes, reflecting fear of an eruption of class-based conflict.
Being highly detrimental towards local economies in destroying crops and livestock, Chilean incursions thus often fomented peasant mobilisation. Whilst President Iglesias negotiated the cessation of hostilities under the Treaty of Anc In defending a region from a foreign threat, the conflict permitted the forging of an enhanced consciousness of inter-community identities, helping to establish "bonds of solidarity". If the war advanced the state's concept of national consciousness for the masses, it did not appear to be endorsed by many.
This is not to suggest however that the composition of wartime peasant reaction and civil conflict within Peru's hinterlands was uniform, nor that uprising was merely the product of a unified objection to state and regional elite authority. Though the war provided the stimulus for civil strife in many regions, it did not spark a universal lower-class revolt. Based on the Within communities, support for the breakaway general depended on a complex interaction of factors, particularly the shape of local power dynamics and the extent of geo-political detachment from centralised authority. Within the Mantaro Valley in the Jun In the valley's south around the Huancayo province, the prolonged destructive presence of the Chilean forces - and the collaborationist stance adopted by prominent local landowners like Jacinto Cevallos - inspired the projection of a class-based proto-nationalism on the part of the local peasantry. Conversely, with a relatively lesser Chilean presence and greater entwining of interests, Mantaro's northern social groups did not to replicate the mutual hostility of their southern counterparts, instead proffering a multi-class defence of the land. Reflecting the local elite's dominance, peasant nationalism was not be given the same opportunity to develop, with the lower class remaining more easily controlled.
In the north-western Department of Cajamarca, a unique set of circumstances spawned an alternative national resistance, rooted in an alliance between the elite and peasantry in rebellion against the state. Dismayed by the government's inability to counter the invasion, local landowners and merchants directed the peasantry in an effective challenge of the Chilean forces. The ability to formulate and manipulate a multi-class, multi-ethnic resistance owed much to the lack of strong native roots in the region. With peasants confined to dependence on the local
With Miguel Iglesias presiding over weak political legitimacy in the post-war period, a strictly indigenous disaffection with the state would however gain momentum in parts of the country more conducive to independent protest, materialising most palpably as the rebellion led by Pedro Pablo Atusparia in Huaraz. As a direct response to Prefect Noriega's iniquitous designs on labour and taxation, Atusparia mediated a wave of Indian discontent at exploitation. Atusparia's supporters would appropriate their militancy as affirming their status as true citizens, seeking to unhinge a system that neglected the reciprocity intrinsic to fiscal convention. These groups, in demonstrating a confrontational response to external ruling forces, regenerated an established tradition of questioning state legitimacy.
While indigenous appreciation of the nation grew markedly as a consequence of the war, the resultant mobilisation elucidated the continuance of creole problems with the interior. Motivated by fears intensified by developments across the sierra, the elite would respond with greater efforts at subjugation. Reinvigorated by an emergent positivism and racist biological strands, Peru's prevailing liberal discourse reaffirmed the ideology of enlightened government and elite dominance. While much of the country's disparate populace might more clearly project an idea of citizenship at the century's end, the authorities would be apt to counter challenges to political authority, revitalising the assault on the Indian geographical and psychological landscape.
In conclusion, nineteenth century Indian conceptions of the nation developed considerably as Peru established itself after independence. The bulk of the population would remain scattered across a diverse geographical landscape, but state alterations to tribute and taxation systems, the erosion of communal property rights, and participation in a war with a foreign power all contributed to heighten Indian acknowledgement of the nation state. The general trend towards a liberal republican direction would nonetheless prove at odds with the indigenous population's desire to maintain their traditional communities, and the gulf between the government's modernising rhetoric and conservative use of the In challenging financial mismanagement and abuse of power on a local level, Indian groups manifested an established political consciousness and general distaste for the state's failure to keep its side of the bargain. This did not necessarily equate to a national consciousness however, and it was not until their defence of the Chilean destruction of local communities advanced notions of a common cause and bridged regional divisions, but such notions did not automatically evolve into patriotism and regard for state power. With the government looking to refill its coffers after the war, much of the central Peruvian highlands descended into revolt. In light of a wartime conscription demands, this action highlighted the peasantry's disdain for the government's renewed emphasis on taxation and oppression, and the direction the nation was taking. Though maintenance of an exploitative model had facilitated elite control of a peasant mass in preliminary years, it ultimately inhibited commitment to the country's liberal trajectory, leading intellectuals to once again examine the "Indian problem" retarding modern development. While the elite would return its attention to the unruly indigenous majority, Indians themselves appeared at odds with the position imposed upon them, rejecting its assault on their prosperity and rights.