The Social Contract, published in 1762 is Rousseau's best-known work and the most intensively studied. Many have devoted their time in assessing The Social Contract in its totality, however it is clearly out of a question to attempt a comprehensive treatment of it on that extensive scale here hence I shall merely attempt to highlight the crucial cardinal issues and give a fairly thorough account to the extent that it is sufficient for a just overall understanding of his work and its worth.
The first half of the essay will present an explanatory view of Rousseau's fundamental problem in terms of its origins and nature as well as the solution he proposed which will examine the essence, legislation and execution of the general will. Having illuminated Rousseau's political thought of the fundamental problem and the accompanying solution, the second part will adopt a critical and evaluative analysis of the general will, focusing on its limitations, practicality and relevance in the application to and practice of politics and ultimately assessing the worth of his solution.
The diagnosis of the fundamental problem stemmed from The Discourse on Inequality, published in 1754 of which he theorized about the original or natural state of man and charted the development or degradation towards the formation of civil society.
Rousseau's conception of the state of nature parallels the other social contract theorists in that it is a hypothetical condition of humanity before the state's foundation with law and morality. But he extends beyond that definition to envision it as "an analytical device that signals a special condition, viz., that amoral condition where the only rule is the rule of superior force". It is questionable whether such a state of nature can ever exist as there can be no qualitative or quantitative measures to affirm its existence but it is an important starting point of which we can compare the effects societal development have on mankind.
Rousseau's envisioned man in his natural state as isolated, self interested neutral beings with amour de soi (self love) and that "man was born free". In addition, man possessed natural liberty which was only limited by the powers of the individual and implied no duty towards individuals or from others to them. In essence, he is neither a mere object in the hands of nature nor the will of any other person. In direct contrast, a political man possesses a "partial and corporate existence" because "all natural powers are completely dead in a political society". It is obvious that he conceived the difference between natural man and political man in very sharp terms.
His greatest criticism of modern political society was that it is insufficiently political; it "compromises between the utter artificiality and communality of political life and the naturalness and independence of pre-political life" which divides man against himself, enjoying neither the "amoral independence of nature nor the moral elevation afforded by true socialization".
Furthermore, the unnatural creation of social institutions will ultimately lead to the creation of "chains" of dependence; material dependence as we depend on each other for livelihood and psychological dependence due to our dependence on the opinion and will of others and to the unruly passions of envy, pride, jealousy and glory to satisfy our amour propre (egoistic self love). In close relation, Hobbes also mentioned in the Leviathan, the metaphor of chains of laws as artificial chains, stating that men have created "Artificiall chains called Civill Lawes..." In this aspect, Rousseau is aware that laws can be chains but he is also proposing that not all chains of laws are inimical to our freedom, in actuality, legitimized chains uphold the common good. Therefore, in this respect, he echoes Locke as a proponent of 'positive freedom'; his notions of freedom stems from being free from dependence in contrast to 'negative freedom' from interference advocated by classical liberals.
As much as Rousseau voiced criticisms against modern society, he recognized that the transition from the state of nature to society is an inevitable and irreversible process brought about by the need for self- preservation. Therefore, the accompanying problem lies not in abandoning the "chains" but in seeking a solution that facilitates and justifies the legitimization of the change from natural freedom to civil and moral freedom.
Rousseau's fundamental problem is neatly encapsulated as the search for "a form of association that defends and protects the person and goods of each associate with all the common force and by means of which each one, uniting with all, nevertheless obeys only himself and remains as free as before".
By this astounding statement, the fundamental problem was to find reasons or basis of legitimacy that would make obedience to political law and adherence to a political order justified. In essence, it was to "unite what right sanctions with what is prescribed by interest, in order that justice and utility may in no case be divided" such that rule of law is compatible with individual freedom.
Hence, Rousseau's view of the fundamental problem presents itself as a theoretical alternative to the order propounded in Leviathan for Hobbes had done nothing to ameliorate the essential wrongness of modern politics: private interest was rampant and indeed paramount, in Hobbes's system. Indeed, his problem was also a lot more extensive than Locke's who had merely to "provide a judge and a sanction for an already acknowledged law"  while his problem is to provide an alternative political system in place of total anarchy and to "create out of illegality the rule of law and at the same time preserve the principle of liberty".
The need for a solution arises from a state of necessity when "men having reached the point where the obstacles that interfere with their preservation in the state of nature prevail by their resistance over the forces which each individual can muster to maintain himself in that state". Therefore, as much as institutions may have corrupted men but they also offer the solution to his problems; to establish a legitimate association guided by the general will, upheld by legitimate laws formulated by and applied to all to ensure equality, liberty and security for all. Rightly put, "let us endeavour to derive from the evil itself the remedy which will cure it". With that, the "social contract holds the solution" to the "fundamental problem".
We shall examine the solution by structurally breaking it into its various ideological branches, starting with the concept of an association.
To fully grasp Rousseau's solution to the fundamental problem, it is insufficient to simply highlight the theoretical aspect of it.
As we challenge Rousseau's solution by questioning his assumptions and generalizations, we open up another question in this field of enquiry; whether his theoretical solution can exist as a practical solution to the fundamental problem. With that, more questions arise. To what extent is it a legitimate solution? Is it not a solution that leads to more problems? Such areas of doubt will be examined below, though there may not be adequate answers to the questions raised, yet the fact that there are questionable areas speaks sufficiently for the theory.
In effect, it is a theory detached from reality. It becomes evident that there are too many conditions to be fulfilled in order to achieve this ideal solution. Its implausibility arises from his method of laying down one contract containing one set of terms that was applicable to any and all societies and his reliance on arguments not based on historical premise and quantifiable research that leads to its fallacy.
As such if we take the worth of any political theory to be weighed in relative terms such as its theoretical credibility and relevance to practical politics, it is safe to assert that Rousseau presents a solution to the fundamental problem but not the best nor most practical solution.
Even with its limitations and drawbacks as a practical solution, it will be unfair for us to impose our expectations of the theory before understanding his intentions. What Rousseau intended was to formulate an ideal civil society to which we should aware of and we should all aspire towards.
He brings us through what is needed if individuals are to be liberated from the will of others and addresses faults in political culture and institutions that are plainly still with us in contrast to the idealistic social contract model he offers. By this manner, the strength of his theory lies in raising awareness of what is lacking and inadequate in civil society, for once we have identified the conditions of legitimate authority; we can see how impossible it would be to create it, so we are saddled with the inferior and illegitimate sort of societies which actually prevail. By deliberating resorting to such a paradox, he is not concerned to deny the received opinion which the paradox appears to challenge but to alert the reader of something which he might otherwise overlook.
His fundamental focus is to provide a theoretical justification for the republic and not to the practical question of how it can be brought into existence. This is a doctrine whose only claim is to provide a solution to hypothetical problems and which does not pretend to offer a historical reconstruction of the way in which political societies evolved. Rousseau's purpose is to deal with the justification of society, not its origins.
Henceforth, if we examined the fundamental problem and his accompanying solution to it with his intentions in mind, it is a noble attempt to fuse individual consent with the most distinctive and profound elements of contract theory, with his perfect unified ancient models built upon a foundational idea of the morality of the common good to bridge the connection between individual and state, such that each gains a fuller meaning.