With the 2008 Beijing Olympics in the making, it adds to the global recognition that China is fast emerging and will potentially emerge as the next global power as well as a regional powerhouse in South East Asia. To account for how and when it emerged in the international limelight is as controversial as the debate on the implications of its rise.
The essay rests on a fundamental acknowledgement of China's rise as an on-going dynamic process in an evolving global context and the crux of the essay lies more importantly with the implications of its rise for the major status quo powers, set within the parameters of a global and regional Asia-Pacific context.
In essence, there are many accompanying questions that fuel the debate between "the China Threat" and the "Peaceful rise of China"; will China be a satisfied mature power or an insecure defensive nouveau riche power? Will it flex its muscles or will they atrophy? Will Beijing seek regional hegemony or peaceful coexistence with its neighbours? Such will be the major issues that the essay will focus on and attempt to address. With such thematic issues in mind, the essay will also flow systematically from the initial definitional to the argumentative and finally to the conclusive section all directed towards the analysis of the implications of China's possession and use of power. In relation, the entire essay is also metaphorically stringed up by a central theme of the "Great Wall" of China which accompanies and reinforces the current debate on China's strengths and weaknesses seen from outside and within, whether such metaphorical and real walls of fortresses translates to aggressive threat or defensive gestures.
The debate on the global implications of China's rise is clearly divided into two separatist camps; the realist conception of the "China Threat" and the liberalist notion of the "Peaceful rise of China".
The origins of the "China Threat" thesis arose in the early 1990s when China's economy posted exceptional growth which conveniently translated into a potential military and economic threat in the eyes of western advocates. Recently, it has been revived with United States' fear of a rising dragon in the Asia Pacific region.
As the "China Threat" theory became a common currency, the term "Peaceful Rise" was invented as an important counterweight to the prevalent "China Threat" or "China Collapse" theories in the West. One of its central tenets is that China will never seek hegemony and asserting it was a skilful diplomatic move to assure others concerned about China's growing economic and military strength. Yet ironically, the term has also played into the hands of China's critics, some of the more strident of whom "shudder at the mere mention of the word 'rise' in connection with China" for it draws parallels with the rise of Germany and Japan.
With that in mind, it is more accurate to coin China's rise as a "re-emergence". As Joseph Nye reinforced rightly that, "China rise is somewhat of a misidentification; it is more of a return to power. China dominated the Asia-Pacific region from 500 to 1500 and now seeks to restore itself as a great regional power." This will set the start of the essay on an unbiased footing which examines the "Peaceful re-emergence of China" vis--vis the "China Threat" theory, drawing no parallels with the rise of other previous antagonistic world powers.
Before we embark on establishing the implication of its re-emergence, it is also pivotal to establish the qualitative and quantitative indicators that established its re-emergence on the world's scale.
Clearly, measuring Chinese real capabilities and intentions at this critical junction in world history "is all the more complicated by the profound domestic social, economic and ecological transformation that China is experiencing even as the global system in which it is now embedded undergoes a structural and political metamorphosis." Hence we can only fall back on indicators that are the building blocks of international influence giving rise to "estimated power".
The first and most important indicator will be economic statistics. Its re-emergence has been marked by economics, with growth rates of 8 to 9 percent per year that have led to a tripling of its GNP in less than two decades. At a more sustainable rate of growth of 6 percent per head, China would reach $10,000-per-person income in thirty years and its economy would then total about $16 trillion, or twice the size of the current American economy. Furthermore, it is an economic power by the "nature of the world's economic stake in China." The continued growth of the Chinese economy is a sustaining force for the world economy.
Militarily, it was only in the late 1990s that China implemented a modernization program that increasingly emphasized the importance of "limited war under high-technology conditions". At the same time, the continuing strength of the Chinese economy and the availability of advanced armaments from an economically strapped Russian military industry provided them the opportunities to act on these motivations. The result was the emergence of "pockets of excellence" within the ground, air and naval forces of the PLA.
To top it off, an external catalytic event seemed to reinforce perceptions of China's international standing and likely future role. The International Monetary Fund's (IMF) decision in 1993 to switch its method of calculating national wealth from one based on currency exchange rates to one relied on purchasing power parity (PPP) resulted in new results of China's GDP that was actually four times larger than previously thought which advanced China to the third place from the tenth.
While China seems to showcase its might to the world, the more important issue lies not in how much power China possesses but its intention in its use or abuse of power. Conceptions of power, threat and peace are all normative concepts in international relations. Whether we adhere to the "China Threat" theory or the "Peaceful re-emergence" hypothesis, it is evident that the proponents of both schools of thought derived their validness from their own respective domestic and international security concerns yet whether one holds more validity than the other in the current context will depend on the criterion assessment and definition of a threat defined by China as well as the rest of the world.
To begin with, theories that focus on the dynamics of changing power relations in the international system all gear favourably towards the "China Threat" thesis. Theories such as the "hegemonic instability theory" and "balance of power theory" highlight the incongruity between a rising power's growing capabilities and its continued subordinate status in an international political system dominated by a hegemon (United States) that will result in inevitable conflicts.
Likewise, historical precedence has shown that nations in economic transition tend to be externally assertive and that accommodating a rising power into the established order has proved difficult and disruptive. After all, violent conflict followed the rise of Athens and Rome in classical times, Habsburg Empire in 16 th century, France in the 17 th century, England in the 18 th century Germany in the 19 th and 20 th century and Japan and Soviet Union in the 20 th century. There is no reason to think that China would depart from this norm.
Although it would be an intellectual oversight and oversimplification to examine China's re-emergence in merely these historical and theoretical contexts for the translation of strength to threat is not as straightforward as theorists hypothesized; instead there are some "hard and soft" arguments which state that the "China Threat" thesis is over-exaggerated and out of sync with reality and it is more apt to align China's re-emergence with the peaceful hypothesis, yet keeping in mind that this hypothesis is also conditional.
The following assessment on the implications of China's re-emergence will be examined systematically below, starting with the hard arguments, which centre on outcomes that are logically derived from objective circumstances, dealing with capabilities or anticipated but not unintended consequences.
In conjunction with all the above analysis, a relative assessment of threat must stem from a multidirectional approach; evaluating Chinese capabilities relative to others and the extent of threat it poses to each significant adversary. Surely, China cannot be equally 'powerful' in all issue areas (structural power) and in all relationships (relational power).
Additionally, it is overly simplistic to classify its re-emergence in its totality as a threat or opportunity, for its re-emergence inevitably presents the established powers with both threats and opportunities; some stand to benefit by its emergence, others fear that they will be disadvantaged.
In this case, it is not possible to describe China's relations with every entity of the world; hence the essay will examine its relations with countries such as Japan, United States and Taiwan to the extent that it gives a sufficient and just overview of China's impact on the world.
Many China watchers would agree with the assertion that "China's intentions are perhaps even more important than its capabilities." This "soft" argument approach highlights the intentions of the Chinese in relation to that of their adversaries; whether it is a threat or not depends on their malign or benign intentions.
It is unfair to judge China's actions purely from an outsider's point of view: its intentions may be defensive even if they appear aggressive. Its behaviour is often misunderstood because China's strategic situation is so different from that of the other major powers, and because the Chinese feel safer in hiding the logic of their actions than in explaining them. "Such misunderstanding can be dangerous for friends and even more so for rivals".
It may appear threatening but its posture stems from defensive security concerns. For a country that has weathered civil wars and periods of disunity lasting for centuries, no other country can comprehend the intensity of its security concerns. In particular, the United States is separated from Asia and Europe by oceans and shares borders with two much weaker countries, which are allies, on the contrary, China sits in the middle of the Asian continent, bordered by potential foes.
Besides it sees itself being more threatened than being a threat: "the problem of the strong state thesis embedded in the rise-of-China global chorus today is that it does not sufficiently take into account deepening legitimation and ecological crisis". China's external impressive economic growth camouflages a multitude of domestic problems such as increasing disparities between rich and poor, rampant corruption and capricious party rule.
In consequence, its behaviour begins to make sense only if one looks at where it is located in the world, what assets and liabilities it brings to the defense of its own security and how its leaders see their country's vulnerabilities. Understanding its causes and consequences should help Western policymakers accommodate China when they should, persuade China when they can and resist China when they must.
The question of whether particular apprehensions about China's role in the future are justified is exercising many minds in the region. But what is important is not just that the answer to that question remains open but China's future regional posture and policies are not and have not yet been determined but are open to the influence of the international community. Hence there is a proactive part that the global community can play in fostering the kind of China that we expect and hope to receive even with its limitations.
Since this essay establishes that China should be received with caution but not alarm, the most appropriate line of action will be "engagement" rather than "containment" which will sustain a "Peaceful re-emergence of China" over time. Engagement employs economic incentives and disincentives to exact desirable behaviour, banking on hard bargaining and low coercion. It should not be the policy goal rather it is a process and a vehicle to the ultimate goal of integrating China into the existing rule-based, institutionalized and normative international system. Even if we engage china, there is no guarantee of friendship, but at least there will be a reasonable prospect and perhaps minimize the chances of strength translating to threat.
China re-emergence is troubling for its global and regional implications are uncertain. Coupled with the lack of knowledge about Chinese policy making that is still very much hidden behind great walls, there is a great concern as to whether its rising strength translates into threat.
The essay started on the premise that its strength has been inaccurately portrayed if we define power in purely economic and military terms and if we include more extensive assessment criterions, we would be aware of China's internal insecurities, domestic concerns and defensive posture which may not even translate to real strength. Even with its supposed strength, this would not translate into a contemporary threat if we are aware of its peaceful and defensive disposition. In addition, if China projects its power with the global consequences in mind, it is very much tied down by 'world governance' - multilateral security and economic institutions to refine and define China's actions. With all these open possibilities in an evolving era, we should not outrightly equate strength to threat.
Above all, it must be stressed that neither hypothesis, be it the "China Threat" or "Peaceful re-emergence of China" is substantial to account for such a complex phenomenon with its far ranging impact on so many actors and regions over time. China is a big enough power that its choice is not merely between obeying the world's rules or flouting them, hence upholding peace or posing threat respectively. Though, it has been argued that China is more inclined to peace than threat.
Even then, the applicability of this "peaceful re-emergence" hypothesis over time is conditional. It will depend on how China defines and implements its foreign and domestic policies, how others relate and respond to China and how China will reciprocate accordingly. As such, it calls for shared responsibility to shoulder a potential "China Threat"; China needs to be more persuasive in its actions than just rhetoric and there is a need for a western policy that reflects an understanding of and sensitivity to the factors that motivate Chinese policies and responses. With mutual understanding between China and the world, the "China Threat" may not snowball into a real threat and remains purely a myth even if it is a misguided one. In all, let us embrace the awakened dragon with optimism accompanied by caution and vigilance.