The past centuries have witnessed an "ongoing struggle between and amongst political ideologies" as liberals, socialists, conservatives, nationalists and others have proposed rival interpretations of political reality. In spite of their many differences, however, the mainstream approaches have all ignored the political significance of sexual divisions. It is only with the nineteenth-century emergence of the women's movement, and more powerfully with the rise of 'second-wave' feminism the 1960's, that the issue of gender was "raised . . . as a major challenge to the discipline [of political science]." By forcing the customarily public scope of politics to embrace the private sphere, by exposing the patriarchal assumptions underlying conventional political theory, and by drawing attention to the fundamental role of gender in shaping all aspects of life, feminism puts the dominant institutions of political thought into serious question. The core feminist themes reveal that the traditional ideologies, and in particular liberalism, provide a highly biased and male-oriented interpretation of reality - they may consequently be "inadequate vehicles for advancing the social role of women". The emergence of feminism as a distinctive political ideology challenges mainstream theorists to reconsider their understanding of the political world.
Conventional political theories have long ignored the issue of gender divisions. Feminism, by contrast, argues that gender is the deepest and most significant of political rifts, and claims that mainstream political ideology has "neglected analyses of sex and gender to its own detriment". The feminist view of gender is based on a clear distinction between sex, understood as the biological, immutable differences between males and females, and gender, the more malleable, socially constructed male and female identities. Sex is a common pretext for female oppression; the traditional view that women are destined to domestic work as an inescapable result of their biological function as mothers, for example, often bars women from political participation. Likewise, most societies uphold a conception of gender that diminishes women and highlights male superiority through "socially learnt and culturally variable" processes of 'engenderment'. Feminists question both modes of discrimination. They argue that as sex is an unchangeable characteristic, "existing independently of [mankind's] representations of it", it should not serve to justify differential attitudes towards males and females. Furthermore, feminists hope to reconstruct the current understanding of gender; their primary political project is to attain a notion of genderless 'personhood' in which individuals are no longer categorised according to sex. The feminist aspiration to abolish gender boundaries is criticised by difference feminists, who stress that there are essential differences between men and women, and that social norms must value and preserve both distinct 'manly' and 'womanly' qualities. Yet whatever their conflicting agendas may be, all feminists identify gender as a crucial analytical category, something that the more conventional political ideologies fail to do. By bringing the notion of gender to the attention of political scholars and practitioners, therefore, "feminist scholars have pointed out numerous flaws . . . in mainstream political theory".
In addition to attacking the social construction of gender, feminism makes the controversial claim that "the personal is political". Mainstream ideologies regard politics as activity confined to the 'public' sphere of government and believe that, in the interest of protecting the natural rights and freedoms of individuals, this field should be clearly separated from an apolitical private realm. However, the same schools of thought have traditionally ascribed men to the public areas of "non-domestic, economic, and political life" while seeing women as better suited to private life. This leads feminists to argue that restricting politics to the public sphere is a "strategy of depoliticisation": not only does it normalise and legitimate male domination, but it also silences any potential opposition to this status quo by entirely excluding women from political debate. Feminists contend instead that politics exists wherever social conflict or "power-structured relationships" of domination are found, and that "neither the realm of domestic, personal life, nor that of non-domestic . . . life, can be understood or interpreted in isolation from the other". In the 1970s, for example, Milett's Sexual Politics and Germaine Greer's The Female Eunuch eroded the borders of the 'political' by addressing the psychological and sexual aspects of gender imbalances within the home. By striving to bring private power relations into traditional political considerations, feminists have considerably destabilised conventional understandings of politics and "entailed the remarking of its boundaries".
The public-private divide upheld by conventional political theory, feminists maintain, is only one of numerous ideological concepts perpetuating female oppression. Indeed, feminism perceives political reality itself as a social construction and claims that most political outcomes can be explained by examining the ideas - and especially the beliefs about sexual difference - underlying them. In particular, radical feminists such as Miller have identified 'patriarchy' as the main belief system that pervades political, social, and economic structures in every society to ensure a "systematic, institutionalised and pervasive process of gender oppression". In patriarchal systems, all power relationships between men and women replicate the father's initial dominance within the family unit. Patriarchal paradigms have a gender-biased influence on most political arrangements, including on the structure of legal frameworks. The French Code Civil, for instance, Europe's first codification of private law, explicitly describes strength ("puissance") as a characteristic of the husband, while identifying dependency ("incapacit") as a trait typical of the wife. This formally establishes the marital relationship as one of domination. For liberal feminists, patriarchy continues to shape socio-political outcomes today, contributing to the under-representation of women in politics, professions, and public life. The concept of patriarchy thus issues a significant challenge to existing political thought: as stated by Carole Pateman, "almost all political theorists have in fact, explicitly or tacitly, upheld patriarchal right".
Indeed, the feminist critique of traditional political thought can be carried further still to reveal "mainstream political theory as one of the very discourses that help perpetuate men's power of control". It would seem that even liberalism, which theoretically promises both men and women freedom and equality, in fact rests upon highly patriarchal assumptions. Liberalism is founded upon the notion of individualism: it sees securing the individual's freedom as the principal priority of political interactions. The key trait of the liberal 'individual' is that he is rational, capable of making decisions in his best interest. These characteristics contrast remarkably to those of the archetypical woman, who has long been perceived as weak and emotional, characterised not by her mind but by her body. Indeed, Mary Wollstonecraft's claim that women were capable of rational thought caused an uproar in the 1760s, and, according to Carole Pateman, women's lack of rationality is still seen to be a 'natural' difference between the sexes today. Liberalism's rational conception of the individual, combined with its belief that autonomous reasoning is an exclusively male attribute, dismisses women as unfit for political life and "not properly deserving of the rights granted to individuals by the state." It may be that liberalism, far from adopting a neutral conception of gender, is a key discourse of patriarchy. As expressed by Pateman, "Locke's 'individual' is masculine".
The feminist challenge to liberalism also questions this ideology's second founding principle, that of the social contract. In the words of Judith Squires, "the social contract that generates liberal politics and establishes the political freedom of individuals simultaneously entails the sexual subordination of women in marriage". Indeed, Pateman argues that the social contract hides within it an oppressive 'sexual contract', a mechanism whereby men formalise their rights over women in a secure civil framework. This structure is best illustrated by capitalism, which, socialist feminists argue, confines women to the domestic sphere through a marital contract specifically designed to meet certain economic interests. As housewives, women serve to raise children into a disciplined new work force; they enhance men's productivity in paid labour by relieving them of the task of child-rearing; they provide an incentive for men to be productive and earn wages to support their families; and they can become a 'reserve army of labour' that is employed at no cost in times of need. In this way, the recent Western development of capitalism may have transformed the wife into being "her husband's economic dependent." The growth of capitalist industry in England, for example, saw the economic, legal and marital status of women decline dramatically from the seventeenth to nineteenth centuries, until their "economic dependence upon, and subordination to, their husbands was virtually complete". Women thus "constitute a permanent embarrassment and problem for liberal political theory": they reveal that this school of thought, far from promoting freedom and equality, may be a major patriarchal tool.
Since feminism's inception, skeptics have attacked the ideology with claims that it "lacks the depth and strength of other kinds of scholarly analyses, especially those favored by the mainstream". However, such criticism is misguided: rather than suffering from a lack of analytical purchase, feminism has generated insightful new concepts that are unsettling the bases of conventional political theories. By tackling gender as a fundamental political divide, feminists highlight power relationships and social constructions hitherto ignored by mainstream thinkers. By stressing the significance of the private sphere of activity, they broaden the traditionally restricted and institutionalist scope of political analysis. By revealing the existence of a universal paradigm of patriarchy, they suggest that the dominant ideologies encourage a distorted, gender-biased interpretation of political reality. To quote Gillian Youngs,"mainstream concepts of [politics] have been traditionally constrained by masculinist blinkers" - it is time for feminism to overthrow the dominant patriarchal paradigms and reveal political reality for what it truly is.