When modifying their economy's output level, governments often resort to fiscal policy: manipulating government-spending and taxation to influence overall economic output. Whilst it has been described as "the central reason for impressive economic growth" Its effectiveness is variable, and primarily depends on the size of government-spending and taxation multipliers and on the extent of an economy's crowding-out (to what degree an increase in private spending in the goods-market - triggered by tax cuts or boosted government expenditure - is undesirably countered in the money-market by a drop in investment and an increase in savings). The size of crowding-out and of these multipliers varies with the slopes of the IS and LM curves, as economies reach equilibrium where IS=LM. These slopes in turn depend on an economy's sensitivity of investment to both income and interest rate, its marginal propensity to consume, its income-tax levels, and its sensitivity of money demand to both income and interest rate. Mathematically and economically analyzing each of these components will hopefully yield insight into the use and effectiveness of fiscal policy in today's economies.
Equilibrium in an economy's goods-market is expressed by the IS curve, which follows the equation Y = [(Co - C As G (government-spending) and T (taxes) are also central to this equation, fiscal policy - changes in G or T - clearly affects an economy's goods-market equilibrium.
Fiscal policy also impacts Money-market equilibrium (where real money demand equals real money supply) lies along the LM curve, which follows the equation i = (M/ d
When the IS and LM equations are solved simultaneously, they produce an income level Y
Both IS and LM therefore impact fiscal policy's effectiveness. Expansionary fiscal policy, involving increasing spending (G) or decreasing taxes (T), would for instance shift the IS curve to the right (increasing output to Y To return to equilibrium (where IS once again equals LM) the economy undergoes the following automatic responses: the increase in IS triggers excess money demand of Y Demand for bonds therefore drops, decreasing bonds' price, which in turn causes the interest rate to rise (i This rise increases returns to saving as well as the cost of investment - as a result, investment drops while savings rise, withdrawing money from the economy's circulation and thus reducing spending. Output therefore moves back down (C D), settling the economy's new equilibrium output level at Y This drop in output is a result of the crowding-out effect, by which increased government-spending boosts private spending but counter-availingly decreases private investment. The larger crowding-out is, the less effective fiscal policy therefore becomes.
Graphically, the extent of crowding-out varies with the IS and LM curves' slopes:
Comparing a relatively flat LM curve (LM The interest rate has to rise by less to choke off EDM - i Crowding-out is therefore lower and fiscal policy more effective when the LM curve has a smaller slope.
Comparing a set of shallow IS curves (IS If both sets shift by the same amount due to equal increases in government-spending (dG), the resulting EDM in the IS Nevertheless, fiscal policy remains more effective with IS Following the same dG, the shallower IS curves therefore settle at a higher equilibrium output than the steeper ones (Y Crowding-out is thus lower and fiscal policy more effective the shallower the IS curve is.
These conclusions are confirmed by a more economic analysis of the IS and LM curves' slopes. The LM curve, firstly, follows the equation i = (M/ d Mathematically, a smaller slope implies a low d As d Lower EDM implies that holding illiquid money is not so costly, so demand for bonds, and therefore their price, do not fall as much. Accordingly, interest rate does not rise as much, and thus does not inhibit investment or attract savings as much. Output therefore drops by less - fiscal modifications in the goods-market have a smaller 'spill-over' effect into the money-market, and crowding-out is lower. A high d A low d
The IS curve, in turn, has a slope of [(1 - C Mathematically, higher values of C Economically, higher marginal propensity to consume (C Moreover, a low b Fiscal policy is thus more effective the smaller b
Beside the IS and LM curves' slopes, an economy's tax and government-spending multipliers significantly impact fiscal policy's effectiveness. The higher these multipliers are, the more increases in consumer income (generated through welfare benefits or tax cuts) will affect output. If, for instance, government-spending increases consumer income by dG, a high government multiplier will cause consumers to spend a large fraction of this new income on goods; the sellers of those goods will then themselves experience an increase in income, part of which they will in turn spend, and so on. Accordingly, high tax or government multipliers increase output by more than the initial fiscal policy move (Y These multipliers are therefore vital to this policy's effectiveness.
The government-spending multiplier is the partial derivative of the IS-LM function with respect to G. As this function, Ye = [(Co - C When T = To + T
Ye = [(Co - The government-spending multiplier is therefore [d Mathematically, the multiplier is bigger as d This is confirmed economically: a higher marginal propensity to consume (C A lower tax rate (T Also, a lower sensitivity of money demand to income (d Lastly, less sensitivity of investment to interest rate (b
The tax multiplier (differentiating with respect to T It therefore increases in much the same way as the government-spending multiplier. As C Expansionary fiscal policy may accordingly affect consumer behaviour more when undertaken as a welfare increase than when it results from tax cuts.
Having analysed the parameters C Higher marginal propensity to consume, sensitivity of investment to interest rate, and sensitivity of money demand to income all enhance fiscal policy's effects, whilst increases in income-tax levels, sensitivity of investment to income, and sensitivity of money demand to interest rate all reduce fiscal effectiveness. Armed with such conclusions, we must however remain cautious when applying them to today's world, as, in an environment of externally-managed, corruption-weakened and culturally biased economies, economic theories pertaining to government policy are seldom fully reflected in practice.