This paper describes and compares electron transport by mitochondria in eukaryotes with electron transport by various different bacteria. From studying these various forms of electron transport in respiration, it was concluded that electron transport in bacteria and in mitochondria are similar in the following respects: the electron carriers are arranged in an order of increasingly more positive reduction potential and the energy released in electron transport is utilised to generate a proton motive force, used to synthesise ATP. (Madiganal. 126-127) However, differences are present in the numbers and types of electron carriers used and likewise the complexes pumping protons.
The electron transport in respiration is a process by which electrons are transferred from an electron donor, such as NADH, to an electron acceptor, for example oxygen, through a sequence of membrane-associated electron carriers. This transfer releases energy, allowing for the pumping of protons across the cell membrane, creating an electrochemical gradient. The resulting proton motive force allows for the synthesis of ATP from ADP and inorganic phosphate. Although details such as electron carriers used differ, this general process is present in all eukaryotes and prokaryotes as a form of producing ATP. For example, bacteria that have electron transport chains very similar to mitochondria's include As will be subsequently described, the former is considered to be descendant of the bacterium that was incorporated into the eukaryotic cell, now a mitochondrion.
Bacteria that have electron transport chains less similar to the mitochondrial electron transport chain, for example those using different electron donors including hydrogen oxidising bacteria and sulfur oxidising bacteria, are also considered in this essay among others. In addition, anaerobic respiration in bacteria, with nitrate and sulfur as a final electron acceptors are also described, including comparison with the electron transport chain in mitochondria. Finally, a bacterium that does not use an electron transport chain is briefly described to illustrate the diversity found in the bacterial respiration system and that an electron transport chain is not essential for ATP synthesis.
In Eukaryotes, electron transport occurs within large proteins present in the inner mitochondrial membrane. Electrons are transported by these protein complexes from NADH (or FADH NADH is a high energy molecule due to the high transfer potential of electrons, produced by carbon fuels oxidised in the Krebs cycle. This electron motive force is converted into a proton motive force by three electron driven proton pumps in the inner mitochondrial membrane: NADH-Q oxidoreductase, Q-cytochrome c oxidoreductase and cytochrome c oxidase. These protein complexes contain several redox centres, including quinones, flavins, iron-sulfur clusters, hemes and copper ions. (Bergal. 492)
Fig. 1 on the left shows the electron transport system where electrons are transferred from substrates to oxygen. This is a scheme typical of mitochondria. In addition to the three proton pumps mentioned above, the mitochondrial electron transport chain consists of another complex called succinate-Q reductase, which links the transport chain to the Krebs cycle. Fig. 2 on the right represents the membrane, showing the location of these key electron carriers, whose redox centres are outlined in Fig. 1. (Madiganal. 127) Fig. 2 is a diagram of the membrane of A mitochondrion and this bacterium contain the same transporter protein because the mitochondrion was originally a free-living bacterium, which was incorporated into the cell by an endosymbiotic event. (Bergal. 492) The bacterium that is said to be the most closely related to mitochondria is
Analysis of the genes in the bacterium in contrast with the mitochondrion's has allowed for this conclusion to be reached. ( Hence, The only obvious difference between them is that in the mitochondrion hydrogen ions are pumped into the intermembrane space, whereas in the bacterium protons are pumped into the environment. The second membrane around mitochondria appeared when the ancestor of the bacterium
Although the electron transport chain of these two bacteria show close similarities to that of the mitochondria, many other bacteria have different electron transport chains. While the basic mechanism, in which a proton motive force is obtained leading to the synthesis of ATP is very similar, the numbers and types of electron carriers involved are different. For example, in (Madiganal. 126)
Chemolithotrophs are organisms that use inorganic electron donors. A number of these organisms use hydrogen as an electron donor. In aerobic hydrogen oxidising bacteria, hydrogen is oxidised by oxygen, a reaction catalysed by an enzyme called hydrogenase. Electrons are transferred from hydrogen to a quinone acceptor and then through a sequence of cytochromes until ultimately oxygen is reduced to water. As in all electron transport chains, this process results with the formation of a proton motive force. Fig. 3 illustrates the electron transport chain of a hydrogen oxidising bacteria, such as As can be seen in the diagram, one hydrogenase is membrane associated and the other is soluble. The membrane bound hydrogenase is the one that is involved in electron transport. (Madiganal. 568) Unlike the electron transport chain in mitochondria, it is a H Also, the chain in hydrogen oxidising bacteria lack flavoproteins and iron-sulfur proteins. However, the general structure and mechanism by which the proton motive force is reached is remarkably similar to the mitochondria's.
Reduced sulfur compounds can also be used as electron donors. Most common of these are hydrogen sulfide, elemental sulfur and thiosulfate. The diagram overleaf, Fig. 4, describes an electron transport chain of a sulfur oxidising bacteria. Electrons from sulfur compounds enter the electron transport chain at flavoprotein, which then flow to quinone, cytochrome b, cytochrome c, cytochrome aa H+ is pumped out of the cell at two points of the chain, at the quinone and cytochrome aa If the electron donor used is thiosulfate or elemental sulfur, electrons enter the chain at cytochrome c. (Madiganal. 570) Again, like the electron transport chain of the hydrogen oxidising bacteria, an iron-sulfur protein is missing, compared to the mitochondrial electron transport chain.
Aerobic oxidation of iron from ferrous (Fe The respiratory chain of (Madiganal. 572) In the transport chain, the ferrous iron is oxidised to Fe The electron is then transferred to cytochrome c and subsequently cytochrome a is reduced.
Since respiration is aerobic, the final electron acceptor is again oxygen, which is reduced to water when it accepts the two electrons from cytochrome a. Again the key cytochromes, c and a, are present as shown in Fig. 5. Compared with electron transport in mitochondria, and the transport chains studied thus far, quinone is not present. Also, flavoproteins are missing. Both iron oxidising bacteria and sulfur oxidising bacteria do not contain any iron-sulfur proteins since these elements are used as electron donors and the electron transporters should be present in increasing reduction potential.
Some bacteria use inorganic nitrogen compounds such as ammonia and nitrite as electron donors. These compounds are oxidised aerobically by chemolithotrophic nitrifying bacteria. These bacteria can be classified roughly in two groups: one oxidising NH Fig. 6 shows an electron transport chain of an ammonia oxidising bacteria. First, ammonia is oxidised by ammonia monooxygenase (AMO), producing hydroxylamine (NH Then another enzyme called hydroxylamine oxidoreductase (HAO) oxidises NH Two of these electrons and two protons are used to reduce one atom of oxygen into water. As shown in the diagram (Fig. 6), two electrons from oxidation of NH Therefore, only two of the four electrons produced form the oxidation of ammonia to nitrite reaches cytochrome aa So the differences of this electron transport chain from that of the mitochondria are as follows: there are no flavoproteins or iron-sulfur proteins present, and NAD+ is not used an electron donor. There are also two types of cytochrome c, one in the membrane and the other in the periplasm, whereas in the mitochondrial electron transport there is cytochrome bc Nitrite oxidising bacteria, however, use an enzyme called nitrite oxidoreductase (NOR in Fig. 7) to oxidise NH This electron transport chain is much simpler compared to that of the ammonia oxidising bacteria. Electrons are transferred to cytochrome c and then to cytochrome aa (Madiganal. 574)
Although only a fraction of bacteria have been considered in this essay, it has allowed for the diversity of processes which exist to produce ATP to be illustrated, from bacteria that have electron transport chains very similar to mitochondrial electron transport such as in
According to
The presence of a series of membrane-associated electron carriers arranged in order of increasingly more positive E
An alternation in the chain of electron-only and hydrogen-atom only carriers
Generation of a proton motive force as a result of charge separation across the membrane, acidic outside and alkaline inside." (126~127)
However, if the few types electron transport chains studied in this essay are to be considered, it can be said that many of the bacterial electron transport chain have some common electron carriers with mitochondria. For example, flavoproteins are not only present in mitochondria but also in Moreover, in However, by far the most common electron transporter was cytochrome c. All the electron transport chains considered in this essay contained some form of a cytochrome.
It was surprising to discover that there is an organism that does not use an electron transport chain. The electron transport chain was possibly lost through evolution, where using a certain substrate meant that it was more efficient to use another method of ATP formation than the usual electron transport chain to produce a proton motive force. Nevertheless, the similarities of electron transport chain between all other bacteria suggest that the electron transport chain of the bacteria studied and indeed the mitochondria have a common lineage, but due to selective pressures, such as availability of various oxidation and reduction agents, certain changes have been favoured over others.