This experiment involved studying the kinetics of the reaction catalysed by alkaline phosphatase. First, the responses of the enzyme to differing pH and temperature were examined. Optimum pH and temperature were determined to be 9.5 and 44C respectively. Then, the Michaelis Menten constant was determined by plotting a Lineweaver Burk and Eadie Hofstee plot from the results obtained of enzyme action at differing substrate concentrations. K M was calculated to be approximately 1mmoldm -3. The product inhibition of alkaline phosphatase by inorganic phosphate was also examined, and it was established that the lowest phosphate concentration to produce marked change to enzyme activity was 20mmoldm -3. This is much above the product produced in the other assays, ensuring that no product inhibition occurred during the rest of the experiment.
Finally the order of reaction was confirmed to be first order; the rate of the reaction catalysed by alkaline phosphatase is proportional to the concentration of p-nitrophenyl phosphate at concentrations where enzyme is not saturated with substrate.
The enzyme used in this experiment was alkaline phosphatase, catalysing the hydrolysis of p-nitrophenyl phosphate to p-nitrophenol and inorganic phosphate.
This reaction is particularly easy to assay due to the fact that the product of the reaction, p-nitrophenol is a coloured compound at low pH. This means that its concentration can be determined simply by measuring absorption at 410nm. The low pH is achieved by addition of a strong base, NaOH (aq), which also causes the denaturing of the enzyme, hence stopping the reaction at the required time.
For this first order enzyme catalysed reaction, at low substrate concentrations the rate of reaction is proportional to the concentration of the substrate. However, at higher concentrations the rate reaches a maximum, V max. This is when the enzyme is saturated. The Michaelis-Menten constant (K M), is the substrate concentration when the rate of reaction is  V max. K M is always the same for a particular enzyme with a particular substrate. Its value can be a useful to compare different enzymes catalysing the same reaction as it will indicate which enzyme can function efficiently at low substrate concentrations. (ie. the enzyme with lower K M value)
For the effects of pH and temperature on enzyme activity, the method in sections 11.4.2 of the laboratory manual was followed. For the determination of the Michaelis-Menten constant, the tubes were set up as shown in table 3. in the appendix (p.8). To each of these tubes, 1cm 3 of buffer was added to make up 3cm 3 volumes. The blank for the spectrophotometer was prepared by eliminating the substrate, but making sure to make up the 3cm 3 volumes. The reaction was started by the addition of 1cm 3 of the enzyme, alkaline phosphatase. Then the steps in 11.4.2 (ii), (iii) and (iv) were carried out.
The experiment analysing product inhibition of enzyme action required tubes with varying concentration of phosphate (Table 7., appendix p. 10) to be prepared. The blank for the spectrophotometer did not include any substrate. The reaction was started and terminated as explained in the laboratory manual.
Finally, the time course assay of the enzyme reaction was carry out by preparing 11 test tubes each containing 2cm 3 p-nitrophenyl phosphate (5mM in 0,05M glycine buffer, pH9.5) and 1cm 3 buffer. The reaction was started upon addition of 1cm 3 of enzyme. Then, the reaction was stopped with addition of NaOH (aq) at 0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0 min and then at 2 min intervals until 20 min. The amount of p-nitrophenol produced was determined by measuring A 410.