The aim of this experiment was to obtain measurements of photosynthetic activity in isolated chloroplasts using an oxygen electrode. Oxygen evolution was measured for samples in various conditions and then the rate of oxygen evolution was calculated. The rate of oxygen evolution in control conditions was determined to be 62.2mol of O 2 / mg chlorophyll / hour. It was discovered that when in presence of DCMU there was no evolution of oxygen. Upon addition of ADP with potassium phosphate, the rate increased to 117mol of O 2 / mg chlorophyll / hour. However, without a source of phosphate the rate remained the same as the control. A limiting amount of ferricyanide also revealed to keep the rate of oxygen evolution constant. Upon addition of ammonium chloride rate increased over three fold, and subsequent addition of ADP did not change the value of 206mol of O 2 / mg chlorophyll / hour. Finally with double the concentration of chlorophyll, rate calculated as mol of O 2 / hour also doubled.
This experiment was concerned with the electron transport chain of pea seedling photosynthesis and its relationship to ATP synthesis. The "light reaction" of photosynthesis (photophosphorylation) was studied in osmotically shocked chloroplasts so that hydrophilic reagents such as electron acceptors have access to the thylakoid membrane. Then CO 2 fixation (also known as the "dark reaction") was driven by electron transport and photophosphorylation.
The electrode used consists of a platinum cathode and silver anodes. A thin membrane is stretched over the electrode which separates the electrode elements bathed in an electrolyte of saturated KCl from the reaction solution in the sample chamber. The membrane is permeable to gases including oxygen which then can come into contact with the surface of the platinum cathode. If a voltage of about 0.6V is applied across the cell, oxygen is reduced at the cathode. Hence the current flowing through the electrode system is directly proportional to the amount of oxygen passing through the membrane. According to the laws of diffusion, the rate of oxygen flowing through the membrane depends on the concentration of dissolved oxygen in sample. Therefore the extent of the current flow in the electrode is directly related to the concentration of dissolved oxygen.
Hill reaction was demonstrated using the oxygen electrode with potassium ferricyanide as the Hill oxidant. In the 1930s, Robin Hill demonstrated that the light reaction of photosynthesis is an electron transfer reaction by showing that isolated chloroplasts will evolve oxygen in the light as long as it is provided with a suitable electron acceptor, known as a Hill oxidant. The oxygen evolved in photosynthesis comes from the oxidation of water, which is coupled to the reduction of the Hill oxidant (A).
Photosynthetic phosphorylation is direct synthesis of ATP coupled to electron transport, and non-cyclic photophosphorylation is ATP synthesis driven by non-cyclic electron transport like that involved in the Hill reaction. Cyclic photophosphorylation is driven by cyclic electron transport and no net oxidation reduction or oxygen evolution occurs.
Below show the differences between cyclic and non-cyclic phosphorylation
The method described in the laboratory manual was followed. No changes were made to the set procedure.
Raw data and calculations can be found in the appendix (p.6~9)
The table below shows the various conditions studied and the values obtained for the rate of oxygen evolution.
As can be seen from the results above, when DCMU, a herbicide, is added, there is no evolution of oxygen.
When ADP and potassium phosphate is added in the reaction medium, the rate of oxygen evolution increases. The increase is almost double the value obtained in the control when 30l of 20mM ADP is added. However, when ADP alone is added without a source of phosphate, there is no change in rate.
Addition of ammonium chloride, an uncoupler, also has the effect of increasing the rate, by over three times when 30l of 0.5M ammonium chloride is added. When ADP is added subsequently, there is no change observed, the rate remains very high.
Limiting amounts of ferricyanide appears to have no effect in changing the rate of oxygen evolution. This could be used to confirm the calibration of the electrode, as shown in the appendix on page 7.
Doubling the amount of chlorophyll in the reaction sample has no effect in the rate of oxygen evolution because the units used are mol of O 2 / mg chlorophyll / hour. However, calculating the rate of oxygen evolution as mol of O 2 / hour shows the following:
This shows that the rate of oxygen evolution doubles when the concentration of chlorophyll doubles. Hence the concentration of chlorophyll and rate of oxygen evolution are directly proportional.
Possible reasons for the outcome of these experiments will now be discussed in the next section.