This essay describes the structure and mechanism of the F It also discusses the experimental evidence leading to these inferences and touches on recent experiments that clarify the exact mechanism in which ATP synthase works. The structure of the F Moreover, the interaction of these two domains and the manner in which rotation occurs is explained. Finally, two hypotheses for the mechanism of ATP synthesis reaction are illustrated.
From the time Peter Mitchell proposed the chemiosmotic hypothesis in the 1960s, researchers have been speculating on how ATP synthesis could be coupled by a proton gradient. By 1977, experiments conducted by Berg After numerous experiments, it is now known that ATP synthase is the key enzyme involved in ATP synthesis from ADP and inorganic phosphate, using the proton motive force. The enzyme is a membrane bound protein, and is found in the plasma membrane of prokaryotes, the thylakoid membrane of chloroplasts in plants and in the inner mitochondrial membrane of eukaryotes.
The overall molecular mass of the complex is 520kDa (Capaldi 1999) and it is though to be the world's smallest rotary engine. (Wang It also has an extremely high mechanical efficiency, calculated by taking the ration of the average viscous dissipation per step to the free energy of hydrolysis, of almost 100%. Wang
ATP synthase is also often called ATPase, which is because it was discovered through the catalysis of ATP hydrolysis. This is the reaction for which most experimental data has been obtained (Weber The reason behind this because the synthesis of ATP is more difficult to study as a proton gradient is necessary. Hence much of the evidence behind the structure and mechanism of the F However, a novel experiment (Itoh This experiment provided direct evidence for the synthesis of ATP driven by mechanical energy.
The structure and mechanisms put forward that are discussed in this essay are all supported by various experiments involving a range of different techniques, such as genetic study, nuclear magnetic resonance analysis, X-ray analysis, electron microscopy, video fluorescence microscopy, studies of mutants and chemical cross linking among others.
The F Based on the knowledge of The F The The The symmetry of this structure is broken down by the central stalk made of This stalk is one of the two stalks that join the F1 and FO parts. The second is a peripheral one that involves subunits (Capaldi 1) shows the general structure of the F1FO type ATP synthase as described.
These two parts, the F F However, ATP formed in the catalytic site of F (Capaldi
X-ray crystallographic studies by John Walker (Abrahams Addition of excess ATP lead to the binding of ATP in all three sites, with lower affinity binding at the second and third sites. Although the affinities for the substrates were lower for the other two sites, enzyme activity, however, increased. That is, in the words of Capaldi This unusual property was explained by a hypothesis proposed by Boyer, namely the "binding charge" or "alternating site" hypothesis. Essentially, Boyer suggested that each of the three catalytic sites are in different conformation at any one time. One is open and ready for ATP (or ADP+P Boyer proposed that ATP binding would result in the closure of the open site and cause a cooperative conformational change, inducing the other two sites to change - the closed site to partly open and the party open site to open completely. In this way, each site would alternate between three states as ATP hydrolysis progresses (or in the reverse direction if ATP synthesis is considered)
This was an insightful proposal by Boyer, but the problem still remained on how these conformation changes could be propagated between the three catalytic sites and in what manner these events were coupled to proton translocation. Again it was Boyer that suggested that both could occur by the rotation of one or more subunits in the F It is now known that it is in fact the Further details on the mechanism of the rotation will be covered in a later section.
In contrast to the detailed structural model that has been established for the F The reasons described by Stock As a consequence, it has not been possible to build a clear atomic model of this portion of ATP synthase.
Nevertheless, the electron densities of the However, the exact number of In their 1999 review, Stock Therefore, the number of "A ring with 10 c subunits in it suggests that the H+/ATP ratio is probably nonintegral and that its value lie between three and four. Many of the experimentally measured H+/ATP ratio lies in this range". (Stock
Originally, three different catalytic site conformations were proposed (open, loose, tight), as shown in Fig. 2 overleaf. However, now with recent data, this explanation is thought to be confusing and insufficient. Weber This alternate mechanism will be discussed subsequently.
Although Fig. 2 shows ADP and P Hence, the amount of free Mg
The rotor part of the ATP synthase is: 2. Cross linking studies show that joining the (Watts (Tsunoda The stator must be strong enough to resist the rotor torque (Weber
According to studies by Elston 3)
Under a fluorescent microscope, the anticlockwise rotation of the actin filament in 120 4, overleaf) while ATP was hydrolysed.
Later experiments replaced the actin filaments with gold beads of 40nm diameter, producing less drag compared to the actin filament and allowed an advance in the time resolution. (as explained by Weber Other experiments (by Tsunoda For example, Stock The extensive contact between the However, to build a clearer model of the generation of rotation, it was necessary to establish the interaction between the
A recent experiment by Itoh Their experiment involved attaching a magnetic bead to the Rotation the magnet and hence the
The rotation of the c As mentioned earlier, it is almost 100% efficient. This was the basis for the idea of elastic power transmission. Essentially, the proposal is that the "energy can be stored during the rotational step by protein conformational torsion, then released smoothly to be translated into ligand binding affinity changes." (Weber It is thought that the flexibility of the
An experiment conducted by Rastogi "It was proposed that this rotation couples the protonation and deportonation reaction to angular displacement of (Weber The general agreement is that each of the
The interaction of between the c subunit and the proton is thought to have a property like an electrostatic carrier mechanism. Recent studies, according to Fillingame In the case of the Moreover, subunit Another important amino acid residue is one on the This is thought to lower the pKa of the From this, it can be deduced that if the This would be in agreement with the proposal by Weber
Earlier in the essay, it was suggested that Boyer's binding charge hypothesis is ambiguous and not directly supported by the experimental evidence. Weber 5.
Weber "A corollary is that only a molecule with all three sites filled can rotate. This emphasises a major point, that the F Hence they explain that two sites are not enough and that only when the third catalytic site is occupied the conformational changes occur.
After decades of research on ATP synthase, a clearer picture of its structure has been developed and with it the understanding of its mechanism has matured. However, there are still areas that need to be studied in more detail. For example, mechanism of transport through F There is also a need for a more detailed structures of this part, as the lack of high resolution structure of subunit