This essay describes some selected studies using comparative microbial genomics. Two investigations are discussed in detail, namely those on These studies reflect the importance of comparative microbial genomics for the better understanding of microbes. It is apparent that the comparison of complete genome sequences can reveal the variation in gene content that may affect observed phenotypic differences in infectivity and virulence between closely related strains. In addition, genes that have been deliberately introduced into bio warfare agents can be identified. Among the many discoveries from studying the complete genome sequence of these two examples, perhaps the most significant outcomes are the identification of virulence factors and surface exposed proteins that may be important targets for drug design against the pathogens.
Comparative microbial genomics involves comparison of bacteria, requiring a range of sophisticated bioinformatic techniques, and is usually based on completely sequenced genomes. An important outcome of these comparative studies is to provide an insight into the genetic basis of observed phenotypic differences of different microbes and also different strains of the same species. Discovering the genetics behind phenotypic differences in infectivity and virulence allows the pathogenesis of bacteria to be understood. Moreover, these studies may also provide a better understanding of their resistance to certain antibiotics and even facilitate identification of genes that may have been deliberately introduced into bio warfare agents.
According to Read As well as outlining studies involved in the identification of genes that are conserved between species to allow clarification of their phylogeny, this essay will discuss the uses of comparative microbial genomics to improve our current understanding of the genetics behind virulence of important pathogens.
In their review in The first one of these involves These include In short, these analyses concluded that the common ancestor of Other important results, such as the location of potential virulence factors and genes encoding surface proteins which could be targets for future vaccines were discussed, however, these details will be described subsequently in this essay.
A second, important ongoing analysis has been on  The small gene was also discovered to have genes involved in attachment and invasion into eukaryotic cells. These organisms are unique in that they can penetrate mammalian collagen and hyaluronic acids. It is thought that the genes for motility, chemotaxis and the shape of the spirochete are also present on this chromosome. Knowing that the shape of the spirochete is a result of the gene products involved in cell-envelope murein layer synthesis may help to understand its virulence, since its shape and unusual motility is thought to contribute to its pathogenicity.
The third and fourth analyses described by Sebaihia  This bacterium is tough and is resistant to many physical and chemical stresses and is known to acquire resistance at a very fast rate. The genome of the vancomycin resistant chemical It has one chromosome and three plasmids and one quarter of its genome was found to be made up of mobile and foreign DNA. This leads to a high level of genome fluidity and is the probably the reason for the bacterium's "rapid acquisition and dissemination of virulence and drug resistance". (Paulsen
Another member of the human gut flora, For example, its genome included seven capsular polysaccharide biosynthesis loci and some of these genes are regulated by a promoter inversion, which are able to switch the genes on and off.  This means that the organism is able to sense and respond with ease and flexibility to changes in the environment. Knowledge of the genetic basis behind these abilities is valuable for the better understanding of microbes such as
In 2002 Read The reference was a strain used in databases that was originally isolated from a dead cow in Texas in 1981. This strain was coined The Porton chromosome, that is, the The aim of these comparative studies was to find markers, including single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), inserted or deleted sequences (indels) and variable number tandem repeats (VNTRs).
Only four differences were discovered between the main chromosomes of the Florida and Porton isolates, which suggested that the two are very closely related. The four differences were two SNPs and two indels. Although the differences that were found were few, many of these SNPs have a phenotypic effect. These changes, however, may be possibly due to the relaxed selection of Because the Porton isolates have no pXO plasmids, the Florida plasmids were compared with the A total of 38 SNPs, eight VNTRs and three large indels were found. In addition to this, two large inversions in the Florida isolate's pXO1, in relation to the Sterne strain, was identified. The pXO1 was found to contain a pathogenicity island which includes genes for the tripartite lethal factor toxin.
To evaluate the utility of the polymorphisms as genetic markers for strain discrimination, the genomic DNA of the following The results obtained showed six distinct groups, as shown in the diagram (fig. 1) on the next page. Of all the plasmid markers tested, nine SNPs and six VNTRs varied between B.  All but three were found in the pXO2, suggesting that this plasmid must be the source of most of the short-term variation in the
Following this study, Read Several chromosomally encoded proteins that may contribute to pathogenicity were found, including haemolysins, phospholipases, iron acquisition factors. In addition, numerous surface proteins, which may be possible targets for vaccine and drugs were found.
In short, the study involved comparative genome hybridisation of However, pXO1 and pXO2 plasmids were found to be more variable between strains; and as found in the previous study, this is where high proportions of transposons and genes involved in toxicity among other genes with unassigned functions are present.
As mentioned before, According to Dixon The sequencing performed by Read
Plasmid transfer within the Despite genomic variability in the This suggests that most genes in
 This means that even potential chromosomal virulence-enhancing genes in Ivanova
Moreover, the chromosome of These include two channel forming type III haemolysins and a complex of three non-haemolytic enterotoxins. Also, there is homology to proteins that contribute to virulence of The homologies may have arisen due to similarities in the pathways of intracellular survival and survival and escape between these organisms.
 Interestingly, a homologue of  The presence of these genes suggests that a recent ancestor of These results mirror the studies done by Ivanova
Germination of anthrax endospore is the key initial event in The Protection of DNA during dormancy and efficient DNA repair during germination are also important factors in endospore viability, genes of which some are found to be homologous to those in Also, Read
Another outcome of these studies is that At the time of Read If this is the case, it is an important target for vaccine and drug design.
A study was undertaken by Paulsen  (Klare These include oxidative stress, desiccation, extremes of temperature and pH. The organism is also able to withstand salinity, bile acids, detergents and antimicrobials.  The study of its genome sequence allows for a better understanding into the pathogenesis of
Over 3000 protein encoding open reading frames (ORFs) were identified on the chromosome and the three plasmids of What was significant is that over 25% of the
The vancomycin resistance was found to be encoded within a previously unknown mobile element with some similarities to the (Garnier However, the remainder of the
Paulsen One of these is associated with a pathogenicity island and integrated plasmid genes. Previously, a large pathogenicity island was identified in (Shankar 2002) Trinucleotide composition analysis revealed that most of this island has a highly atypical composition, except for a region containing integrated plasmid genes. This region encodes multiple homologues of genes found in
The chromosome of These are surface proteins that improve conjugative transfer and have an important role in adhesion to colonic mucosal fibronectin and also translocation across the intestinal epithelium. (Sussmuth et al., 2000). According to Paulsen
 The Enterococcus species have adhensins such as aggregation substance, haemagglutinin and various other virulence factors. In In addition, adhesion lipoproteins including an endocarditis specific antigen, sortases and LPxTG motif cell wall surface anchor proteins were identified. Due to the atypical nucleotide composition of the LPxTG proteins, Paulsen
To evade the immune system, a common tactic of pathogens is to have antigenic or phase variation of surface structures. This is indeed the case for (Paulsen Many of these regions have a complex mosaic structure containing different elements, suggesting they are, as Paulsen The apparent ease for the incorporation of mobile elements in these regions is probably the reason behind its rapid acquisition and dissemination of drug resistance. The study of the complete genome sequence of
From the examples studied, it can be seen that genome based analysis is a powerful tool, which can be used for investigating unexpected outbreaks of infectious diseases in all circumstances: spanning from biological warfare attacks, emerging agents to familiar pathogens. As even monomorphic species like
According to Read The comparison of the whole genome is advantageous in that it allows for polymorphic loci to be identified, which can then be used for PCR-based sampling of variation within bacterial populations. Moreover, comparative genomic sequence is a valuable method because it can reveal novel, lineage-specific markers that enhance the resolution of genotyping schemes. For example, in the study of (2002), eleven DNA sequence differences between the chromosomes of the Florida and Porton isolates were discovered. Solely by their VNTR profiles, these isolates would have been indistinguishable.
Another obvious value of comparing complete genome sequences is that the variances in gene content that may affect observed phenotypic differences in infectivity and virulence between closely related strains can be revealed. In addition, genes that have been deliberately introduced into bio warfare agents can be identified. These comparisons, however, can only be efficient with complete genomes, opposed to multiple, unordered assemblies of "draft" sequences. Hence, there is a necessity for the acquisition of accurate data to increase the span of databases. This means the construction of databases derived from genome-based surveys of natural variation in all major pathogens and not only potential biological warfare agents. (Read