A DNA sequence of approximately 5 kilobases derived from a bacteriophage which infects marine cyanobacteria of the genus Synechococcus was analysed. The 4246 base pair (bp) sequence contained 14 potential open reading frames (ORF) when searching for ORFs with a length of over 100bp. Of these, three of the largest ORFs were studied in further detail. These genes were mostly similar to the genes found in enterobacteria phage T4 and were similar to gene products (gp) 13, 14 and 15. Pairwise similarity to the T4 phage was calculated to be: 28%, 28% and 35% respectively. The Gp13 and gp14 are genes for neck proteins of the phage and gp15 is a terminal capping protein of the tail sheath. The proteins were analysed and it was revealed that as expected, all three were globular proteins. The three proteins also contained common motifs that are also found in the T4 phage gp13, 14 and 15. This supports the fact that probably the enterobacteria phage T4 and the marine cyanobacteria infecting bacteriophage are related. The secondary structures were also predicted and can be viewed in the results section.
Viruses come in a variety of forms, however, the head-tail structure (as seen in Figure 1.) is unique to bacterial viruses. (Dimmock et al., 2001) The figure below shows the T4 bacteriophage, which has a relatively complex structure consisting of an icosahedral head that contains the nucleic acid, the neck structure including whiskers, a tail with an external contractile sheath and a tail core that usually has helical symmetry and is non contractile. The tail ends with a baseplate with tail pins and tail fibres. These different structures of the bacteriophage interact during the infection of a bacterium.
The infection of the bacterium usually occurs by the phage attaching to the host's cell wall. In the case of a bacteriophage like T4, tail fibres attach to the receptor on the bacterial cell wall, allowing the phage to be brought closer to the cell surface. This happens so that contact can be made with the tail pins on the phage's base plate. Once the phage tail pins are in contact with the cell wall, the tail sheath can contract and the tail core penetrates the wall. As a consequence, nucleic acid can pass through the tail
Firstly, the 4246bp sequence was pasted into the ORF Finder to search for potential ORFs of a minimum size of 100bp, using the standard genetic code. The ORFs were searched for homologues using BLASTP using the non-redundant peptide sequence databases. This did not give very specific results, many of the sequences found being unknown environmental sequences. However, a few of the ORFs had similarities with other bacteriophage genes. These were: gp13 neck protein, gp15 tail sheath, gp14 neck protein and gp24. Whether these were of any significance was uncertain, and hence another method of aligning sequences was necessary. That is, multiple sequence alignment, which involves placing "residues in columns that derive from a common ancestral residue by substitutions. The most successful alignment is the one that most closely represents the evolutionary history of the sequences."
ORFs translated into amino acid sequences were examined using PredictProtein which analyses and predicts the structure of the protein sequence. This was carried out for the three largest ORFs, namely the ones that show similarity to the enterobacteria phage T4 gp13, gp14 and gp15. These three were not only chosen because they were the largest genes but because all three showed similarity to structural proteins important for attachment of the tail to the phage head.
With PredictProtein the sequence underwent a number of different analyses: the databases searched for homologues include SWISS-PROT, TrEMBL, PDB and BIG. Then, alignment was undergone by BLASTP, PSIblast and MaxHom, the latter being the multiple sequence alignment program. In addition, there were a number of sequence motif searching methods and a prediction of protein structure. The outcome of PredictProtein which were thought to be significant in the analysis of these three ORFs are tabulated in the results section. Due to the fact that the format of the secondary structure predicted by PHD and PROF in PredictProtein was difficult to reproduce in this document, NNPREDICT was used to produce a prediction of the secondary structure. However, this prediction is less accurate than that made by PHD or PROF as these two latter servers expect the input to an alignment of multiple sequences.
CPHmodels, a homology modelling server, was used to try and build a model of the proteins encoded by each of the three largest genes. However, as no suitable template was found, the server was unable to build a model. This was also the case with SWISS-MODEL.