The doctrine of consideration plays a vital part in English contract law. It states that for a contract to be legally binding, detriment or benefit must be conferred to one of the parties involved. Without consideration, a contract is declared legally void. It is therefore commonplace for the courts to have to deal with cases in which parties are seeking to prove the presence or lack of, consideration in their contract. Due to the common law nature of contracts, it is entirely up to the court to determine whether consideration is present or not, and the judges are only bound by the precedent set by the decisions in other courts involving similar cases.
One of these pieces of precedent that is cited as causing ambiguity was that which was set in the case of Roffey Bros. (1991). The judges who sat on this case, through their decision, went against previous doctrine set in  This has obviously created uncertainty within English contract law, because it is now hazy as to which of the rules to use; that from
In  This therefore, is another point of precedent that
In The guidelines which Glidewell LJ set out in his judgement during
If the 'practical benefit or detriment' rule had been applied in the It could have been held that the boat's Captain had in fact, gained a practical benefit through his staff completing extra work, and consideration would have therefore been present. The decision therefore, could have been in complete contradiction of the one that was actually reached.
Conversely, if the
It can consequently be said that the decision in
The addition of a practical gain or loss to the doctrine of consideration could also create problems for the judiciary because it is their task to decipher what is or is not a practical benefit or detriment. If they apply the However, if the
Patteson J, in  This definition was used as binding precedent for many years, and it can be said that This is because now, the 'eye of the law' believes the practical, not the legal benefit or detriment to be of value, and this is therefore an argument against
The other point of law that The question posed by this arguably indefinite rule, is that if A already had a contractual duty to B to complete a duty, and if B subsequently promises to pay A more to complete his contractual duty, does A provide valid consideration by completing the task that he was already contracted to complete?  It suggests that in the above scenario, valid consideration is not provided. Again though, This is another example of
The It is yet unclear whether this fact indicates that the decision is of little practical significance to English contract law, or whether it has made little impact upon it as a whole. This could therefore be an argument against it having created further ambiguity in the doctrine of consideration, because something that is hardly referred to is unlikely to have a detrimental effect upon such a large area of contract law as consideration.
In conclusion, I personally feel that the decision in Roffey Bros. has not caused further ambiguity in the scope of consideration in English contract law. This is because although it has been cited alongside  This suggests that both the The lack of citation of I feel the decision simply showed how the law is moving; this is towards finding the intentions of the parties rather than the legal aspects of their contract. Therefore, the addition of the