Although the role of the people within politics has long been assessed and discussed, a consensus has failed to emerge, with much of the debate still centring upon the concept of 'politics'. With few formal and representative institutions during the early modern period, formal political participation of the people can be seen to have been minimal, seemingly reinforcing the assertion that they had no role to play in politics. Such an assertion however, can be seen to neglect recent scholarship, which suggests a less polar division between the people and politics, with a greater emphasis placed upon community involvement and the persist acts of resistance and rebellion. In order to then assess the role of the people in politics, we need to consider both the formal and informal ways in which the people participated. Most importantly we need to define the concept of 'politics', as our assessment ultimately rests upon its interpretation. Furthermore we need to consider the lack of homogeneity within the period. Divisions and differences can be found between as well as within composite states and kingdoms, making any over arching assessment problematic and difficult.
Andy Wood in his analysis of popular politics, charts the differing interpretations of the role of the people in politics, arguing that 'social historians of early modern England used to avoid politics'. It was not until the 1980s that a 'new' social history emerged, investigating and recognising; crime, urbanisation, disease, literacy, population growth and social change. Wood argues that for many of these historians, it was still assumed that 'political' affairs were conducted only within established institutions, with the localism of early modern riots not guaranteeing their 'pre-political' character, and that these conflicts over resources possessed no inherent politics.
Such assessments can be challenged by 'post-revisionist' scholarship, which questions the validity of the clear distinctions between 'elite' and 'popular' politics, recognising the formation of a 'public sphere' of debate within early modern European towns. By people, we are referring to the non-elites, those who were not part of the bureaucracy or aristocracy, and did not possess a title of nobility or lordship.
Within much of the Holy Roman Empire, there were few mechanisms of negotiation and reconciliation short of confrontation through which the elites and the people could resolve fundamental differences. Rural commoners were excluded from the territorial estates in which the Princes were able to bargain with their privileges subjects for taxes and support, seemingly removing the people from politics. At a local level, the manorial court did offer a forum in which popular interests found a voice, however the court was an ambiguous institution, 'always drawn uncomfortably between popular custom and the will of the Lord'.
A similar situation existed within England, with local rural politics existing within an institutional order through which lord conflicts and lord interests were mediated. In many parts of England prior to the end of the 1600s, the institutional focus of popular politics was focussed on the manor court. Negotiations took place between manor lord and his 'subjects' over the terms of rent, fines and manorial privileges; controlling access to water and commons, regulating the farming cycle and worked out the terms of temporary and permanent enclosure. Although such representation was exclusive to those to which the franchise extended, it nevertheless provided a channel in which some people could play a part in politics, 'a complex procedure of consideration of issues in both the House of Commons and the House of Lords'
Beat K There existed parliamentary institutions, the
David Sabean in his analysis of the period, also argues that there were institutions that allowed for the people to participate in. In the sixteenth century, inhabitants of the duchy of W However, we should be careful not to over emphasise such an assertion and place it within its context.
It is important to recognise the differences within Europe during this period when assessing the people's involvement within politics, as there were clear divides between and within composite states and kingdoms.
Te Brake argues then that in order to appropriately assess the people's part within politics, there is a need then to 'look outside of the normal channels of electoral politics'. The people could be seen to form popular groups, representing themselves through collective violence in order to bring about, or change, elite preferences and behaviour, particularly when challenged by taxation.
Victor Magagna also rejects the notion that the relationship between the people and the elites was a static one, pointing to the outbreak of the Peasant War, which was 'an attempt to redefine Lordship and power'. Such demands and the formalisation of revolt marked the role of the people in politics, challenging their prescribed obedience.
French communities were also able to act politically. Although neither the King nor the aristocracy regarded ordinary rural people as anything more than a 'source of revenue', excluding them from the assemblies of estates and noble courts, the people were able to involve themselves within politics.
Charles Tilly in his assessment of seventeenth century France challenges, however, the notions that these rebellions were acts of politics, but rather acts of economic anguish. As Tilly concludes, efforts to seize peasant labour, commodities and capital 'violated peasant rights, jeopardised the interests of other parties in peasant production and threatened the ability of the peasants to survive as peasants'. Tilly's analysis thus needs to be placed within its context, where definitions of politics failed to extend beyond formal intuitions; reinterpretations of its constitution thus enables us to reinterpret Tilly's research as supporting the interpretation that the people played a part in politics.
Between 1548-1630 there witnessed earlier waves of tax revolts across the French Kingdom; Angoumois, Croquant and Gauntues during the 1500s, Nouveaux Croquant and Nu-Pieds in the 1630s.
Outright rebellion and riot were often the exception rather than the norm, however James C. Scott argues that there witnessed 'a constant struggle between the peasantry and those who sought to extract labour, food, taxes, rents and interest from them'. Although the manner in which the relationship was challenged appears hidden, it was an attempt by the people to defy obedience that was expected from them, thereby representing a political act by challenging the relationship between master and servant.
Magagna, in his research, points also to community politics, where the people could be seen to have been involved intimately 'to enforce ideals and held practices'. The relationship between men and women was one which was often contested, where both men and women behaved in ways that went beyond their prescribed ideal. Susan Amussen in her research presents evidence to suggest that women were often instigators of food riots, and participated in a variety of protests and rebellions.
We can therefore reject the notion that the people had no role in politics. Throughout the early modern period they were able to influence, to a limited degree, the formal institutions of the state, and far more forcibly their daily lives, through differing degrees of conformity and protest. What should be noted, however, is that experiences were diverse, with differing experiences between, as well as within states, and furthermore between different social groups. Although the term of 'the people' is a usual one, allowing us to investigate the relationship between state elites and the 'others' in society, it perhaps implies too greater homogeneity, distorting the realities of the period. 'The people', needs then to be far greater qualified, in order to recognise these differing experiences, allowing for more comprehensive studies and secure conclusions.