There is immense debate surrounding religious change in the early modern period, accounts differ over its pace, continuity with the past and leading impetus. Jean Delumeau argues that the period marked the first serious attempt to christianise rural Europe by attacking the pagan superstitions that were seemingly rife. John Bossy argues that the period witnessed a shift from corporate to individual Christianity, whilst Robert Birely and Ronnie Hsia emphasise the continuities during the period with the accommodation and retention of traditional religious culture and practice. Despite this lack of consensus, religious practices of the Catholic laity during this period can be identified, and the impact and effect of the Catholic Reformation can be measured. The extent of religious change ultimately, therefore, rests upon what we interpret Catholic practices to be at the beginning of the period, and how these then differed to those at its end. In practice, the change of religious behaviour would appear to be a combination of all three interpretations. Evidence can be found to suggest a more systematic process of christianisation, focused increasingly upon the individual, with the retention and adaptation of traditional religious culture and practice. We should however consider the lack of homogeneity regarding religious practice during this period as regional differences can be found within, as well as between nations, therefore making the question of change problematic.
Delumeau in his interpretation of the changes in religious practice during this period suggests a process of christianisation. Religious preachers actively sought to remove pagan and superstitious practices that were seemingly widespread, replacing them instead with a more Christian and evangelised belief. Delumeau argues that during the early period the religious instruction of the faithful had been 'sadly neglected'.
Fundamental to this process of 'evangelisation' was the role played by the priesthood and the Christian missionaries. The Council of Trent decreed that parish priests and curates resided within their parishes, reasserting their pastoral responsibilities, thereby increasing control over their parishioners' religious beliefs and practice. The ecclesiastical authorities made more frequent demands for austerity and dignity of life from the priesthood, and increasingly marked them off from the world with the wearing of cassocks. Within such an environment, the religious practices of the Catholic laity must be seen then to have changed, as following the proclamation at the Council of Trent, systematic Christian teachings were provided, delivered by a newly competent and educated clergy.
New missionaries across Spain, France and Italy were established such as the Jesuits, Capuchins and Lazarists, which reached to the rural peasantry more directly than ever before. An emphasis was placed upon the learning of prayers and on practical good conduct and sensible behaviour. More 'folks' knew their catechism and could recite basic prayers, the faithful approached confession and received Holy Communion more regularly and matrimony and confirmation became more prominent as sacraments. The period clearly witnessed, therefore, distinct changes to Catholic lay religious practice, marked by increases in the attendance of ceremonies and also a wider awareness of religious obligations.
Despite Bossy's assertion that lay religious practice altered throughout the period, he refutes Delumeau's vision of a previously 'pagan middle ages'. The contrasts between pre-Tridentine Christianity based on natural allegiance, kinship, friendship and locality, to the later organised theological church, administrated by the official authorities, were less extreme than Delumeau suggests. A balance can perhaps be drawn between the two. Despite the lack of formal instruction and the enforcement of discipline in the early period, lay religious practice was still widespread, however it manifested in different forms. What developed in the period was then the formalisation and standardisation of religious behaviour, based upon these traditional practices. This change in practice would seem to be reflected by Bossy's own research, which suggests that there witnessed a transition from collective to individual Christianity.
With the introduction of the confession box by the Milanese bishop Carlo Borromeo, the purpose of confession had clearly altered. By changing the act of confession from a public, or semi-public event, to one of a more personal and individual nature, it altered what the sacrament was really 'felt to be for'. This is reflected also by changes to the meaning of 'Christianity'. Traditional definitions were associated with groups of people, this was replaced in the seventeenth century by a definition concerning a body of beliefs. Changes in practice then can be seen to have been significant, as they reflected changes in beliefs, with a shift from communal to individual relations with God.
Despite changes to religious practice, elements of traditional practice persisted, therefore challenging the extent of change during this period. Hsia and Birely's research into religious practice would also seem to support such an assertion, differing from Delumeau and Bossy by acknowledging a far greater extent in the continuity of religious behaviour throughout the period.
Although the piety became more personal, a communal character was retained. The cult of St. Ignatius in Alsace was integrated into traditional healing with water blessed on his feastday given to heal possession and relieve cramps. They developed a theatrical method in their delivery of St Ignatius's spiritual exercises and sang vernacular hymns to popular tunes. Older medieval traditions were also frequently elaborated and expanded upon, so that continuity with the early period was evident. The development from corporate to personal Christianity and the wider dissemination and awareness of religious obligations were significant developments to lay religious practice throughout the period; therefore the retention of traditional customs should be placed within this wider context of change.
Despite changes seen in religious practice, these changes neither occurred at the same time nor were uniform in their extent across Europe. National differences 'marked the very inception of Tridentine reform', whereas the decrees of the Council were readily adopted in Spain, Belgium, Italy and Poland, their implementations in France and Germany 'lingered' until the eighteenth century. Cities such as Munich, Lyon and Barcelona first felt its effects, 'often with the foundation of a Jesuit college'. Regionally, Northern Italy, the Spanish Netherlands and the Rhineland, Alsace and Lorraine and parts of the Iberian peninsular felt is effects among the laity by the late sixteenth century. This then poses problems of identifying the extent of change in lay Catholic religious practice, as its extent differed within and well as between nations.
There can then be seen to have been significant changes in lay Catholic religious practice throughout this period. There witnessed a shift of emphasis from corporate to individual Christianity, and a formalisation and standardisation of religious behaviour, despite the retention of many traditional practices. Christian teachings were provided and delivered by a newly competent and educated clergy which resulted in increased attendance at church and also a far greater lay awareness of religious obligations. Although there existed continuities in practice throughout the period, the changes that occurred can be seen to have been significant, affecting both the notion of Christianity and Christian behaviour and also the relationship between Christians to God. Despite the rate of change occurring at different paces and extent across Europe, change did occur, and this change, to a large extent, was significant and far reaching.