Key findings and conclusions
It was found that Radstone's annual report does provide a 'true and fair view' of the company's performance. The optimistic outlook is backed up by the company's consistent improvement in performance over the last 5 years.
The annual report is a good indicator of past performance. The profit margin has increased from 4.86% (1999) to 12.63% (2003) and as a result the basic earnings per share have increased from 4.38p to 17.98p over the same period. The company has become more efficient and its liquidity is improved also. They have reduced the gearing from 21.63% to 12.43 % as a result of clearing long-term debts while maintaining a high stock turnover.
For future performance the annual report is good for long-term indication of growth on any potential investment. The information I found from public sources about plans to close a plant in Wales and the acquisition of a specialist technology company in Canada, are certainly justifiable from information in the annual report. The acquisition in particular has increased market share price.
The evaluations and conclusions for past and future performance have been kept separate with Conclusion sections after each separate evaluation.
All the financial figures relating to Radstone's performance have been taken from the Fame database, Fame (2003), unless otherwise stated. (For example, A.R. means the 2003 Radstone annual report).
For the research on the past performance the annual report itself was used including the notes to the financial statements (that make up the majority of the report), the Fame file in Excel format and the Radstone-Best file in Excel format. The class produced ratios and explanations are used as well as the Dyson book to help choose the performance indicators and then relate them to the given task of the assignment.
For the future performance the Factiva database is mainly used, but also the interim report for the 6 months to 30 th September. The format for this section is to present the data, some of which was paraphrased for shortness, then evaluated and compared to the annual report before the conclusions are presented.