The discovery of a sea passage to Asia was not a chief cause for the Ottoman Empire's decline. To assume that the loss of European transit trade was a key factor in the decline is an assumption tainted by an orientalist discourse. More pressing causes for the withering away of the Ottoman state were the incompetence of the Ottoman administration to adapt to changing conditions. Hence, the decline should be attributed to incompetent administrative and economic policies. In addition, failed military adventures contributed to an ever declining central authority. The Dutch Vice-Consul de Willem in Aleppo aptly summarizes this argument - "it is not just one pillar that is broken or weakened, but all four pillars of State: religion, justice, politics and finances." Therefore, to assume that external trade was a major aspect of its decline lends too great of an emphasis to the impact of European trade and the underlying orientalist assumptions. This essay will show that the Ottoman Empire crumbled from within and will attempt to disarm those who accentuate the loss of the transit trade as decisive in the Empire's downfall.
It is necessary to acknowledge that there was a decrease in transit trade due to internal and external developments. Middle Eastern trade is traditionally regarded as consistent of peddlers, with little central organization and barely any 'advance knowledge of their target market'. Thus, they were not able to counter unjust rapacity by custom's officials. As Niels Steensgaard points out, 'the caravans [...] had to pass through many towns and countries, and everywhere the Turkish rulers demanded heavy duties over and above the customary ones'. For instance, after the establishment of the East India Company the British preferred to acquire pepper from India rather than from Ottoman ports as customs duties were approximately 'three times as high in near-eastern ports'.
On another part, the discovery of the sea passage to Asia was a contributing factor to the decline of the transit trade. Yet, it was the subsequent Ottoman failure to realize the opportunity of sea-borne commercial expansion that led to the decrease of the trade flow. Although the Ottoman's were able to prevent the Portuguese from gaining maritime control the superior ships of the Dutch and English managed to gain firm dominion over the Indian Ocean. Hence, the administration was merely unable to control the trade flows on the oceans and were thus excluded from the benefits of far eastern trade.
Nevertheless, there are numerous indications that trade within the Empire was flourishing. A Venetian Consul reports that although the Venetian transit trade was decreasing, "the trade in Aleppo is as flourishing as ever". In this sense, Suraiya Faroqhi argues that in merchant cities such as Ankara and Bursa the internal trade 'led to a significant amount of social differentiation and capital accumulation'.
Unfortunately, there is scarce reliable data to suitably determine the various internal commercial links. Research into this area has long been 'overshadowed by the study of international maritime activities'. However, the very existence of tangible links illustrate that financial loss due to the diversion of transit trade could have easily been recovered through the adjustment of local economies to the domestic market.
Much more significant to the decline of the Ottoman Empire was the incompetence of the ruling class and their inadequate response to change. The  Yet, irregular inflation began to affect many
The ineptitude of officials to regulate an army is mirrored in the civil service's propensity to corruption. Koja Beg's analysis succinctly summarizes this situation, "undeserving people can procure a fief or a salary by means of bribes [...and...] many who have been put down on the army pay lists simply draw their salaries without ever dreaming of serving in a war". In 1610 royal land amounted to 9 per cent of the 1560 value. Land was taken up by officials and courtiers and thus the government lost a significant amount of revenue. Compounding this issue were the sultans of which the 'majority were incompetent, pleasure living spendthrifts, who no longer controlled government decisions'. Indeed, in light of the internal problems facing the Empire the issue of the loss of transit trade seems small in comparison.
The fiscal policy of the Ottoman Empire further added to the decline. Inflation caused by the influx of silver from the New World led to severe financial difficulties within the Empire. Most taxes were levied in Therefore in 1591 the central treasury income was only worth half of what it was in 1534. This subjected the external trade of the empire to free trade by agreeing to numerous capitulations with Western powers. Hence, the belief in economical self-regulation hindered the development of vital fiscal measures to control the effects of inflation. In the midst of this financial crisis the English Ambassador to Istanbul remarked that "as far as I can see, the Turkish Empire was in great decline, almost ruined".
The Ottoman concept of the circle of equity and the firm belief in it hindered the prospects for reform that could have potentially reversed the decline. The circle of equity prescribed the function of each class within the state and the relations between them. Hence, advisors and commentators 'were hampered by the tenets of High Islam, which bound them to the circle of equity hypothesis and restricted their suggestions for action almost entirely to the traditional approach'. However, solutions were sought merely in relation to reinforcing the old order. Therefore, it is apparent that the decline of the Ottoman Empire was largely due to incompetent administrative management that failed to respond to external and internal change.
The extent of the Ottoman Empire was greater in the 1620s than it had been a century before. Indeed, their withdrawal from Malta in 1565 signaled the halt of territorial expansion into Europe and the Mediterranean. In this way, increased amounts of state spending were diverted towards the military cause without any tangible benefits from the annexations of territory. As Colin Imber notes, 'it is unlikely that the tax yield of the new provinces covered the cost of their garrisons'.
At this juncture it is important to make a few points about the orientalist discourse and its relevance to the discussion of the decline of the Ottoman Empire. It is extremely difficult to produce a work about the Orient without forming part of the highly-criticized orientalist discourse. Edward Said argues continuously that,
Filters through which the Ottoman Empire is seen are inevitably tainted by the assumptions of norms. Western socio-economic and political institutions dictate the underlying assumptions about the analysis of all things that represent an However, it has attempted to distance itself from a Eurocentric approach that places large emphasis on external trade routes. Instead, there has been a great effort to demonstrate that the Empire's causes for decline came largely from within.
Hence, in conclusion, the discovery of the sea passage to Asia was not a key factor in the decline of the Ottoman Empire. Much more prominent are internal causes such as corruption and inefficient fiscal policies. The effects of the loss of transit trade on the Ottoman Empire were minimal as local merchants could easily redirect their investments towards the flourishing interior trade. The drive for territorial expansion further lent a destabilizing element to Ottoman society. Therefore, the foundations of the empire crumbled as the old social structures and institutions ceased to adapt to a modern changing society. The overarching topic of the Orient is inevitably seen through the filter of an orientalist discourse. However, a solely post-modern approach to the study of the Ottoman Empire would not be feasible. Hence, some assumptions made in this essay, even though orientalist, contribute to a greater understanding of the decline. In all, the discovery of the sea passage to Asia played little part in the decline of the Ottoman Empire.