Further restructuring of company operations supported by the adoption of Internet links to high-street agents was proposed by the Operations Director and was approved recently. This report analyses the changes to be made and thus recommends the approach for implementation. As IT facilities have progressively been developed improving communications with the high-street agents is believed to be the way forward for the company. With regards to the staff, the Group feels that their concerns should be better addressed in order to avoid any dissatisfaction as seen during the structural change in 2001. Since the proposed changes are breaking new ground as far as the company is concerned, care must be given in ensuring that expenditure are well-monitored and controlled besides keeping risks to a minimum.
The chart below presents the suggested activities and their planned durations.
This project will need the commitment and support from not only those responsible to make the change work but also top-level management as well as the operations staff themselves. Without the cooperation among these groups the project will not succeed in achieving its aim and objectives. The project manager and his team thus play an important role to ensure that tasks are carried out appropriately and according to plan.
From my reading, I have understood that in managing a project not only is control of expenditure important, control of revenue, where applicable, is also vital. Apart from ensuring that amounts spent and received are in accordance with the budget, cost management is also concerned about the appropriateness of the timing of each transaction. However I understand that for internal projects such as the CFS case study there is simply the need to keep expenditure within the budget authorised by the Steering Committee, rather than focusing on safeguarding profits.
One of the things I find most interesting about this topic in relation to the case study is the part about earned value. At first I thought that it would be quite tricky to have earned value as one of the parameters since I feel that it is quite difficult to estimate the value of work done with regards to the nature of the project. Thus I considered not taking it on.
After doing some reading, I realised that earned value is actually a useful tool that is increasingly being used to evaluate the true performance of a project either in terms of deviations in cost or schedule. It is also one of the best methods to be used in estimating time and cost to complete. In a very interesting article, the author provides an analogy portraying the importance of earned value to a project manager with the importance of a carpenter's square to a carpenter. The article was an eye-opener.
However I still feel that with regards to the case study some work packages such as software activities are far less straightforward and much more difficult to assess quantitatively in terms of progress achieved. Surely a manufacturing activity would not face this type of problem. From what I have read it seems that when applying earned value to cases such as the one in the case study, the best way to assess progress is to just ask for an estimate. Thus the main problem is that these are only judgements and people tend to provide an optimistic prediction which may turn out to be erroneous.
A simpler method suggested in another book is the Milestone analysis which is said to need a relatively modest amount of management effort to set up and maintain. Only two sets of data are required to set up a milestone plan; the planned date on which the milestone is to be achieved and the estimated cumulative cost for each milestone. By plotting an actual cost curve on the same axis as the 'planned curve', some degree of analysis can be made by comparing the project performance in terms of progress and cost.
One of the weaknesses of this method is that it does not consider work-in-progress. Activities that have been started but not yet completed are not taken into account because the milestone has yet to be achieved. This I believe distorts the analysis somewhat and may lead the Project Manager to a wrong understanding of the project performance and hence the wrong decision on future actions to be taken. Another shortcoming of this method is that the information that can be used to control the project (e.g. overspending) is usually obtained after the damage has actually been done, something which I think the earned value approach tries to overcome by providing a more detailed analysis thus keeping the user more informed.
All in all, I believe that depending on the sort of financial control needed for a particular project, the financial system adopted must support those responsible for the work packages to monitor and take appropriate action where necessary. With regards to the Project Management module, I feel that it has shed a new and different light to my learning process. By allowing the students to work on a complete case study, many ideas were able to be brought forward and discussed in order to come up with a set of possible solutions or recommendations for the case study. This is where the knowledge learnt from other modules can be applied. For example I have found myself trying to relate what I have learned in Operations Management and Strategic Management Accounting to the Project Management module. Lastly, working on the case study and preparing a report for the board of directors have definitely given me the opportunity to gain some insights of the working environment.