Strategy as a response to external
This view of strategy is what underlies
It is the simplest form of presentation that is of practical value for describing a business and its environment. (Houlden, 1996)
I. Real opportunity - the strengths enable it to pursue opportunities successfully.
II. If the weaknesses significantly lower its performance, decision-maker must consider actions to overcome the weakness.
III. Real threat - it is not equipped to deal with the threat.
IV. Strength can help overcome such threat.
Difficult to determine which factors are the most important at the present time/ the most relevant for the firm?
Iraq opening oil sector:
Strength versus
Strong capacity of a firm is not necessarily the unique competence
Can only be done once, no point of review
Over-Simplification
Not good at dealing with a complex and often paradoxical world (Broklesby&Cummings) -
However, while SWOT is more appropriate for smaller businesses, its nature also leads to its wide application, from project to nation, where a relatively quick analysis is needed
.
Absence of
- Certain industries such as mining must consider the degree of risk the society might entail. They may be examined against the standards of responsiveness to the expectations of society the strategist elects.
- What the executives
Of all the components of strategic choice, the combination of resources and competence is most crucial to success. (de Wit&Meyer, 1998)
Provides
Planners are left without indication as to where to
SWOT remains rooted in (Panagiotou, 2003)
It is an
Duncan, Ginter&Swayne (1998) suggested a four step model for assessing internal strengths and weaknesses After initial survey of both strengths and weaknesses, the focus turned to
SWOT's
SWOT serves as a stepping stone towards the implementation of the Balance Score Card and Strategy Formulation
Combination of SWOT and Maxwell's six dimensions of quality (Storr&Hurst)
I have briefly learnt the framework before but was initially not confident if there would be enough to say about this simple model due to its limited content in both lecture handout and seminar presentation. However, by
During the research of this assignment, one of the questions that I have found intriguing is that
This assignment has left me with a genuine interest in the area of international strategies and strategic thinking, which I would like to explore further.
I have found this form of assignment both enjoyable and intellectually stimulating and would definitely put in more time into reading relevant literatures for my next reflective piece on Governance.