After the module of "Content of Business", the group 25 handed in a business plan for Fantastic Fitness Club by using the basic business knowledge to practice. This assignment is an overall evaluation and analyze of the plan based on more academic reading and understanding foundation. It reviews the whole plan from business description, business environment, marketing plan, infrastructure and support system and finance aspects. The author analyzed the good factors of the plan and also points out the fault consideration of it.
Fantastic Fitness Club is a club for healthy and fitness in service industry. It is founded on the trend of UK's civil need for healthy life style. It is focus on the comprehensive healthy habit, which is not only by exercise, and also with salubrious food in usual life.
(Robert, Barry, Roberta, 1990) pointed out that at present, the marketing matrix has involved into seven elements based on four Ps: product, place, price, promotion, physical evidence, participation and process.
The definition of Information-based technology (IT) is wildly accepted as all equipments which gather, dispose, store or distribute information. In the club case, we will use distribution processing model to organize the support systems. Different parts of operation have small personal computer which under direct control of the staff who would use them. It is cheaper and flexible compared with centralize workstation. (Nigel, Stuart, Robert, 2004) gave the basic types of IT systems as following:
Local area networks (LANs). It is the network which connects distributed processing power and keeps the obvious advantage of centralized computing. Meanwhile, it also can maintain the control and communication benefit of centralize computing. LANs is an intercommunion network which used in restricted distance such as an operation organization. Kinds of equipments are linked to the network, ensuring information which includes data, message and video could be exchanged. The equipments consist of personal computers, printers and minicomputers. The benefit of the network can be concluded to four aspects. Firstly, new equipment can be added to the network easily and fast. Secondly, the workstation and equipments can be located where needed and relocated flexible and without disruption of operation. Finally, self control of the hardware and software by the staff who use them.
Internet: it is the most significant development of telecommunication and information technology.
World Wide Web (www): The club needs to design a homepage for better communication and interaction with customers.
Extranets: it indicates that using internet technology under safe networks to connect companies. It is usually applied to every factors of supply chain management. Compared to other business trading networks, it is affordable and easily to establish and maintain. Kinds of operations can use it such as orders details from suppliers and customers, payments to suppliers and from customers.
E-business: This technology is based on internet. The club can use it as a tool of purchasing because its features-reach widely and abundant resources. At the same time, it saves cost.
Management Information System (MIS): It concerns about the flow of information collected, exchanged, operated and used for management. Planning and control activities always use this system. Such as demand forecasting, inventory management, order processing and quality management. In this case, the club adopts ERP system for the whole organization.
Automatic Identification Technology (Auto ID): the club considers using Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) for the product control during the operations of manufactory, distribution, storage, sales. The strongpoint of this technology is that it helps the company check exactly where every products in the supply chain.
The business plan of Fantastic Fitness Club considered basic elements of overall operations. But still too general and need more research or study to fulfill it. The purpose of this plan is to use theoretical knowledge and tools to practical business environment. Actually, the company needs to consider more carefully in real world.