Manufacturing strategy include a set of decisions which focus on processes and infrastructure investment. It provides crucial support to order winners and qualifiers of market segment of a company. In the past, it always been seen as a tool to provide cooperate request. Nowadays, in a world class manufacturing company, manufacturing strategy can be utilized as competitive advantage for a company, and consistent with marketing, financial and other functions strategies to achieve the highest performance. This assignment is based on an assumption of traditional automotive component manufactory and formulates a complete manufacturing strategy with Hayes and Wheelwright's elements for the requirement of the company's new director. Then it discusses what problems will emerge when implementing the new strategy. Finally, it set up a detail implementation plan and time scale for the plant conversion requirement.
(Storey, 1994) argued that implementation of manufacturing strategy would not successful unless companies take into account of practice of the strategy with human resources and organizational behavior factors. Based on this company's manufacturing strategy, the organization structure and workforce will have a significant revolution. Some existing system and procedures are possible to resist implementation. Here the company uses an academic analysis tool called "Force Field Diagram" to analyze possible restraining forces in company. The Force Field Diagram is a tool for visualize forces which may impact sustain or against change initiatives. This tool can be used as any level such as personal, organization, project and so on. The forces may include people, habits, customs and attitude. Before adopt this tool, the company need to recognize the current and desired situation they wanted. Then they list all forces which may work on positive or negative to the changes and determine the strong extent of them. After that they can find whether there are some solutions to decrease the restraining forces or increase the driving forces. However, most research in this area recommend that reducing the restraining forces is easier to be accepted and operated.
From the figure, the main difficulties in implementation have been analyzed clearly and their impact intensions are displayed. Before considering the supplement strategy to reduce them, the company recognizes them further as following:
The significant revolution of layout from process based to cellular unit will result in the new requirement for workforce skills and job redesign. The existing shop floor workforces are half of fully skills mechanisms and half of semi-skilled machine operators. According to workforce strategy, the first step is to lay off half employees in the shop floor level. Because of the high requirement of skills for new layout, the rest staffs should be full skills mechanisms. They still can not be used immediately by reason of obsolete thought and working approach. They are used to their own specific working procedures and don't have skills on relative other procedures. They pay attention to their piece work and pursue high output because of the reward and payment standard and ignore the product quality. They never involved in the work as a host and just do what the manager told as task. They are lack of responsibility and dedication spirit. In addition, they are afraid of their employ security from this enormous layoff.
People instinct of resisting change
(Slack, 1991) pointed that successful implementation of manufacturing strategy involve changes in many aspects, such as technology, process, culture and organization. It is natural that staffs will feel maladjustment when significant change happening in company. They may bring antipathy and uncooperative attitude when implementing strategy.
Lack of communication
People's understanding of new manufacturing strategy and actions are the foundation of successful implementation of manufacturing strategy. (Storey, 1994) Good understanding is caused by enough communication for all level in the company. The manager's tasks emphasis on heavy duty communication. The shop floor members can not do the right job unless they are fully informed the new policy and understand them. Based on cellular unit process, knowledge and information need to be shared absolutely.
Unfamiliar with new equipments
Caused by reduction of half workforce, the company decided to buy some small and flexible machines replaced of human. These machines are completely new and unacquainted for remnant workforce. They need a period to learn and be proficient in them. This will cause that throughput in the initiate time of implementation go down.
boredom for long time and complicated implementation
Implementation of a strategy usually takes relative long time than ordinary activities. If the organizers do not have a reasonable and calculated plan, the staffs will feel weary after expected period especially no improvement result to be seen. In this case the strategy implementation will be given up and stopped. All the effort already done is useless. Meanwhile, the company will lost capital investment and staff confidence for future.
In a word, all the restraining forces belong to personnel and organization aspects. This confirm most literature opinion that most implementation failure due to human or organizational problems. Here the company added more supplement strategy for avoiding the failures:
Selection
The company should change their viewpoint of employees as component to asset. (Chase, Jacobs and Aquilano, 2004) Component means the employer is interested in staff's current skills compare to future potential development as asset. For future perspective and new manufacturing strategy, the managers need to select potential and aspirant staffs even in new recruitment.
Training and Development
In new manufacturing strategy, training and development is an urgent issue which needs to be done at the initial period of implementation. It includes technology skill training, management skill training and company regulation training. Technology skill training is about the new machines usage and relative working process skills in cellular units. The purpose of it is helping shop floor worker overcome the unfamiliar with new machines and make them have multidiscipline skills for better operation of JIT manufacturing. Management skill training includes self-management skills, time-management skills and teamwork skills which help them work better in a team based environment. Company regulation training is focus on the new strategy action introduction, new work procedures and performance measures.
Communication
(Voss, 1992) argued that communication have new meaning in JIT and TOM. It should penetrate in all levels. The company will arrange senior managers and department managers have a plant tour once a week for eliminating barriers between managers and shop floor staff to promote better direct communication. Another policy is that daily staff meeting can make sub groups to discuss special problems and then present them by the open-plan general office. The company will use all media which including posters, board to list new procedures and regulations. It's better to make them visibility for shop floor workforce implementation.
Project Management
According to (Chase, Jacobs and Aquilano, 2004) definition, a project is a set of relative jobs and activities for required outcome in a demand period time. Project management is the process of planning, directing and controlling resources which include capital, employees, equipments and materials to meet the cost, time, technical restrict of project. The company will use project management tools and methods to implement the whole manufacturing strategy successful in time.
In this case, the manufacturing strategy's most important part is change the plant from process based to cellular based, which means all the machines and staffs need to be arranged by different groups than before. Furthermore, the implementation of manufacturing strategy needs the cooperation between other functions such as human resource, top management and so on. (Hill, 2000) The company use project management as a basic tool to implement the plan. When set up a project, the company should consider the basic flow elements as following:
Appoint a senior executive as champion, project manager: a crucial and basic element of successful implementation is that the top management's commitment and support. The suitable candidate of champion should be the vice director of the company and project manager will be the production department manager.
Set up project team: identify prime contacts, fact-holders, implementers. Since this project involve many different function staffs, the implementers are selected from relative departments and have regular meeting to communicate.
Prepare a detail action plan and budget. After the team formed, they will discuss the whole plan into breakdown target and procedures and estimate budget.
Set up terms of reference, Measures of success. For evaluating the implementation, the project team should set up performance measures and references.
Agreed Oversight and monitoring procedures; the team will review and report how it's going on regularly, and set short term targets. Furthermore they should tell everyone what progress has been made, what is happening next.
Communicate objectives, benefits, timescale throughout the organization: fully communication and penetration of the project will make it easy to be implemented.
Time scale and actions: detail actions are in the time scale figure 8
Monitor progress and amend plan if necessary: sometimes, the plan is
always not perfect and suitable for the practical situation. In that case of
implementation, the team will monitor it and amend it if any necessary.
Meanwhile, the company also needs to consider the special process for changing layout. The detail consideration and time scale is listed as following figure
The initial process of implementation is about 3 months, and then the company will adjust and improve the new system to make it more efficiently and effectively in the future.
Manufacturing strategy is a necessary part of cooperation strategy for a company. It not only serves for marketing and financial requirement, but also gives a competitive advantage for company. Through analysis of an traditional automotive component manufactory's crises and the demand of set up new manufacturing strategy, this assignment adopts Hayes and wheelwright's framework to formulate new manufacturing strategy. Furthermore, it construes possible problems when implementing the new strategy by Force Field Diagram and supplement strategy for solving these problems. Then it set up a detail implementation plan and time scale for changing plant from process based to cellular units. However, all the strategies are formulated under the condition of assumption from the company. In real practice, it will be discussed further and amended if any necessary.