The case study game of PDDM module is a good practice and understanding approach for whole process of product design and development. The team worked from a brainstorming of market to find the gaps/ needs. Then we needed to select one of five alternative designs as final design with material and process selection. After that, the establish costs should be calculated and product specification was confirmed. Finally, the detail project definition with rough time scale up to launch was defined.
Our team identified the gap between customer's need of security of laptop and lack of this kind of products. We brainstormed five possible solutions for this gap, such as locker, alarm, cases, tracking device and anti-theft device. After using the tool called concept convergence to analyze, we decided to design lockers finally. Then we considered the capital cost, revenue costs, production cost together to estimate total cost and return on investment time. We used the project management knowledge from this module to constitute the whole project process.
Our team's strengths are that we found a good product and adopted scientific management skills of product design and development process. Our potential market for laptop locker is huge and less competitors at the moment. This is the precondition for profitable product development. Many management and analysis tools have been used in the whole process, such as brainstorm for finding the gaps, concept convergence for deciding the final design, project management skills for project definition, marketing mix for production launch program and so on. The weaknesses of our team are that we estimate cost roughly and it was imprecisely. We didn't consider that promotion cost was a big part of cost for new product development process. Meanwhile, our product is low techniques and easy to be replicated by other new enter competitors. We should pay more attention to product patent protection to prevent this situation happening.
From this case study, we learnt that every product design and development process need meticulous and detail plan from business mission to cost and profit calculation. Many skills from the PDDM modules can be applied in the practical product development process, such as project management, concept convergence, lean product introduction, investment appraisal and so on.