There is a general consensus among historians that the decades preceding the Great Reform Act witnessed great organisational changes in British politics, as the House of Commons grew in importance and political parties began to develop. The creation of a Tory Party had been hindered by the dominance of Pitt the Younger who strongly opposed political parties, believing instead that 'government should be formed from the best men of all parties' and that the royal prerogative should not be undermined. However, by 1827 a recognisable party with a cohesive policy, loyal membership and strong organisational institutions that extended to the grassroots had not developed. The illusion of its existence has been created by the willingness of contemporaries to believe that they had witnessed the growth of a political party and the determination of historians, with the benefit of hindsight, to trace back its development too far. Ultimately, a Tory Party would not come into being until after the Great Reform Act was passed in 1832.
A key requirement of any political party is to have a cohesive ideology and policy programme which all members share and that is clearly different to those of other parties. There is some evidence to suggest that this did develop during the period in question. O'Gorman suggests that the 1812 Liverpool administration was 'united upon a basis of loyalty to the monarch, a belief in service to country and the defence of established institutions in church and state'. This supports Coleman's claim that people could be in no doubt a 'Tory government...stood for toughness in dealing with threats to the constitution and social order'. Hill suggests that the aftermath of Peterloo in 1819 saw both parties 'prepared to confront each other, each confident of a new sense of purpose'. This suggests that the Tories were behaving as a party, aware of Whig criticisms and weaknesses and attempting to respond with measures acceptable to themselves and that undermined the Whig policy platform.
However, it would be generous to suggest that there was a cohesive policy platform uniting the Tories in the early nineteenth century. O'Gorman acknowledges that the policies of 'defence of the country, the landed interest, property, the established church and resistance to radicalism may have been so generalised that they scarcely amounted to a specific party programme', with issues such as 'Catholic Emancipation and the Slave Trade sometimes cut[ting] across political loyalties'. Consequently if a political grouping is not united over how to solve them, it is hard to justify labelling it a party. The most prominent divide over policy within the group was that between the 'Ultra Tories' who included figures such as Wellington and the 'Liberal Tories' headed by Canning and Peel who advocated different amounts and speeds of reform.
Therefore, it is hard to claim that there was a distinct Tory Party ideology between the years 1806 and 1827. Although it may be argued that internal factions are an inherent characteristic of political parties, the differences in this period amounted to something more significant. Indeed, the fact that a key member of the leadership, Wellington, 'declared in 1828 that he could not see any difference between the Whigs and the Tories', suggests that a distinct party ideology was only to arrive after 1832.
There has been a great amount of attention focussed on division lists from the early nineteenth century, as historians attempt to find definitive evidence for the existence of political parties. It is suggested that the long period of stable Tory rule, especially during the years of Liverpool's Premiership, helped to 'establish habits of regular support and discipline'.
However, closer scrutiny suggests that the validity of this claim is questionable. Loyalty towards the government does not, especially in this time period, signify party loyalty. Fraser cites Sir T.B. Martin as an example of the continuing deference towards the monarchy that remained in the Commons during this period. Martin was an MP who supported Liverpool, Canning, Goderich Wellington and Grey, claiming 'My Party is the King, and the persons he may think fit to appoint as his ministers will always have my support while I am in office'. He claims that 'the fact that attendance averaged about a third at...divisions...suggests that members were more prone to vote out of some positive conviction on the merits of the question that from a general feeling of obligation to support a party. Failing any personal conviction or interest they would not bother to turn up'. He concludes 'this was not a Tory Party of much national repute or credibility'. Despite this, many historians who endorse the concept of a Tory Party during these years suggest that there were organisational developments at Westminster implemented in an attempt to cultivate such a following.
An integral element of any political party is the organisations and institutions the leadership forms at its centre to ensure its effective functioning. Evans has argued that Liverpool had no choice but to begin this process during the decades preceding the Reform Act, claiming 'they [the Tories] could not keep themselves in office without party organisation' during the 1810s and 1820s. This involved 'the distribution and promise of offices and favours' and is clearly an attempt by the Tories to encourage and reward loyalty.
A more significant development was that the Tories appeared to overcome a major obstacle to becoming a party that had 'hampered them throughout the period of the 'Talents' ministry'. The two appointments in quick succession of Portland and then Perceval quickly overcame this problem, with the party accepting the principle of a government based on parliamentary majority not royal influence. Indeed, the rivalry between these groups was so fierce that a clash over the conduct of the war in 1809 led to Castlereagh and Canning engaging in a pistol duel. Seven ministers including Peel and Wellington resigned in 1827 from Canning's government over Catholic Emancipation and his foreign policy. The main reason for this lack of power was that the MPs did not have a dependence on these institutions, primarily because it did not have a significant electoral role.
There can be no question that the rapid growth of the press which had been taking place during this period meant that national issues were growing in political importance. There was an increase from nine million stamps being sold on newspapers in 1760 to thirty-nine million in 1837, resulting in greater public participation in politics. This was illustrated by the 20,000 petitions sent to the government regarding Catholic Emancipation. These developments led O'Gorman to conclude that 'no Prime Minister had to endure the spotlight of publicity and the constant searchlight of hostile criticism that Liverpool had to put up with'. The Hampshire Tory Club that existed only between 1806 and 1807 was an example of this.
Therefore, a Tory party had not developed between 1806 and 1827. There were undoubted advances as the beginnings of a party emerged following the death of Pitt, who had for so long prohibited the growth of a party. Despite this, the organisation that formed during the Premierships of Portland, Perceval and Liverpool was not a political party but a loose association that was simply a stage in a long evolutionary process. In 1827 there was still no clearly defined party with a cohesive ideology and regular, loyal support that played a crucial role in getting its members elected. Ultimately, the trigger for the growth of the party would be the Great Reform Act after which a distinct party emerged based at the Carlton Club, with registration societies in the constituencies and clear policy documents such as the Tamworth manifesto. The formation of the Tory Party was impending, but had not been achieved by 1827.