This essay discussed the structure of antibody Different modern technique, such as NMR, absorbance spectroscopy, X-ray crystallography and mass spectrometry, are used to study the structure and function of some proteins in the monoclonal antibody.
Antibody is a kind of protein that is related to immune system. It belongs to the family of immunoglobulins, whose duty is to bind a specific antigen in order to remove it from the body. Antibody are synthesised from B-lymphocytes, with a different amino acid sequence and a specific binding site for different kinds of antigen, which is called antigenic determinant or epitope.
The structure of antibody is very interesting. Each antibody consists of four polypeptides - two heavy chains and two light chains. They join together to form a "Y" shaped molecule. (see figure 1).
Different kinds of antibodies have different amino acid sequence in the tips of the "Y", which give the antibody its specificity to bind antigen. This variable region is composed of 110-130 amino acids, including the ends of both the light and heavy chains.
The variable region can be further subdivided into hypervariable and framework regions. Hypervariable regions have a high ratio of different amino acid in a given position, which is relative to the most common amino acid in that position. For framework regions, they have more stable amino acids sequences separating the hypervariable regions.
The constant region, on the other hand, determines the mechanism used to destroy antigen. Antibodies are divided into five major classes, IgM, IgG, IgA, IgD, and IgE, depending on their constant region structure and immune functions.
The antibody recognition of antigen is mainly based on the antigen-binding specificity. It is the basis for the ability of the immune system to recognize virtually a foreign antigen. The structural is illustrated in figure 2. V
Monoclonal antibodies are the antibodies that are identical, since they are produced by one type of immune cell. All clones are from a single parent cell. Thus, monoclonal antibodies can specifically bind to a specific substance.
The discovery of monoclonal antibodies can be cast back to 1970s, when the B-cell cancer myeloma was first known, and understood as cancerous B-cell all producing a single type of antibody. This discovery was applied to the study of the structure of antibodies. However, it was not possible to produce the identical antibodies specific to a given antigen. It was not until 1975 that the process of producing monoclonal antibodies was invented, and given by Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1984 for the discovery. The key idea for the invention of monoclonal antibodies was the use a line of myeloma cells, which had already lost their ability to secrete antibodies.
The monoclonal antibodies can be produced artificially by some genetic technique, which is one of the most important techniques of biotechnology during the last century. The circulating B-cell would multiply to form a clone of plasma cells, secreting identical immunoglobulin molecules, when activated by an antigen.
Monoclonal antibody have many applications. It can be used to detect for the presence and quantity of its corresponding substance. It can also be used to purify a substance with techniques called immunoprecipitation and affinity chromatography. This is an important tool in biochemistry, molecular biology and medicine.
Monoclonal antibody is very important in biological studies and medical application. The structure and function of monoclonal antibody is researched a lot by a variety kinds of biophysical techniques, such as Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR), absorbance spectroscopy, X-ray crystallography and mass spectrometry.