This report assesses the current and future position and strategy of Jolly SU.
Current Position:
Current Stock Share price is 1019 with the volume of sales suffering a decline, especially the SULI brand.
All three distribution channels are being utilised, mass merchandise, specialist and department stores
No outstanding loans or R&amp;D projects
Advertising accounts for approx. 60% of budget
Operating solely in Sonites market
Suggested Future Plans:
Marketing Strategy Lessons Learnt:
Carry out detailed analysis of market before launching R&amp;D projects.
Divide management team into individual responsibilities for each element of marketing mix
Don't spend whole budget if returns don't cover the costs
Target market where a bigger profit margin is obtainable
Forecasting is an inexact science and should be relied upon cautiously
Need to target consumers on three dimension, psychological, functional and economic
The current management team for Jolly SU has been in place for the last seven periods. Jolly SU presently operates solely in the competitive Sonite market but there is the potential to expand into the Vodite market. The company's stock price index is 1019, having seen an increase of 1.9% since period zero. The peak stock price was in period four at 1223. Jolly SU is operating in the 2033 K Unit market with three brands of Sonites, SUSI, SULI and SUKA.
The function of this report is to outline and assess the present performance of the company and then to propose the marketing strategy for the next three periods to increase market share and profit.
This report will be split into three fundamental sections. First, an up to date analysis on the current market position and overall financial situation of the company. Second, the suggested plan for the next three periods for the company. Finally, a reflection on the key marketing lessons learnt from the previous seven periods. This will aid future decisions of the company so that the same mistakes are not repeated and conversely the positive aspects can be utilised at a later date.
Jolly SU is currently in decline. The next three months are crucial in order for Jolly SU to survive in this competitive market and to claw back market share and profit.
Figure 6 shows the Main Stages of Consumer Decision making.
Achieving the optimal mix of these elements will encourage all Jolly SU's products to be the selected brands in the customers' evoked set. It is these elements that shall form the basis of this section of the report.
Several key concepts have been learned. First, that the budget does not have to be spent in its entirety. There is no benefit to investment if the return or value gained in return (not necessarily monetary) is the same or equal to the input amount. This is particularly the case with advertising. This is where any extra budget was dispersed and too little or a detrimental affect. Therefore to succeed in a market takes more than just huge advertising expenditures. Promotion alone does not equal success, other factors from the marketing mix have to be incorporated.
The possibility of researching existing products with the view to lowering base costs is worth investigating, as Jolly SU would benefit from the extra profit margin.
It was also found that although market segmentation was more simple than multiple segmentation, it is crucial to appeal to the chosen segment in order to survive.
Target markets need to analysed and compromises have to be made. For example, the SUSI and SUKA markets have the potential to increase as both target markets, others and singles respectively, increase. But on the negative side these sectors have the two lowest average prices per unit at only $195 for others and $225 for singles. Therefore although the markets are advantageous in that the growth rates are impressive the profit margin and amount is lower and therefore the overall contribution by these products is lower.
More in depth analysis of the market research is necessary to improve the performance as all the 5 P's affect marketing. This could have been achieved either by splitting the group into separate areas of the marketing mix or redressing the imbalance in workload of group members.
The customer value model (see Appendix 5) shows how customers compare competing products and to be successful the company must have "a deeper understanding of customer value perceptions and preferences".
Also the fact that research and development is a crucial element especially doing proper research before commissioning the development of a new product. The suspended PSUSU project, costing $100,000, occurred because the market conditions had not been analysed sufficiently. Based on a previous company product, the SUSI, the modifications were not exactly what the target segment required and therefore was scrapped. Another resulting lesson was sometimes it is better to 'cut your losses' and either don't launch a product or remove it from the market.
Getting the perfect product by listening to customers pays dividends as can be seen by SUKA's vast increase in sales in first few periods. Being first into a market is advantageous (E.g. Company E) but waiting till you have the perfect product pays off in the long run (E.g. Company O). Be aware of the product life cycle and how it affects not only Jolly SU but also all the competitors in the market. Taking risks should not be always avoided and a well thought through marketing plan can easily justify a loan. Also forecasting is not an exact science and should be taken as guidelines for a solid marketing strategy and not relied on precisely.
Many lessons have been learnt in the last seven periods, which will hopefully be built upon to strengthen a company with vast potential. Now is the time to invest in promoting flagging products, exploiting growing and investing in new markets. Jolly SU has had a disappointing last few periods but the company has the ability to strive if the right marketing mix strategy is applied. The "heart of modern strategic marketing can be described as STP marketing- segmentation, targeting and positioning" and if this is applied correctly there is a bright future for Jolly SU.