Oticon, one of the world market leaders in hearing aids production and hearing care, is believed wining its success mainly because of two reasons. One is introducing the world's first knowledge-based "Spaghetti Organization" in 1991: a flat, dynamic structure well suited for the realization of ideas, while the other is focusing on people aspect. The essay is going to analyze how Oticon utilized HR policies to help it overcome business pressures, what happened when changing the culture and structure of the organization, and how to optimize motivational function of reward and recognition in Oticon. What is the most important is that through the in-depth analysis, we could learn how to apply various HR theories in the actual situation.
Denmark's Oticon initially founded in 1904, has its headquarter in Copenhagen and more than 50 subsidiary companies and research centers all over the world. As the most old-line professional Audition Group in the world, Oticon is famous for its advanced technology, excellent products, consummate after service system, especially the special Oticon characteristic hearing solution. Besides, it is also the only hearing instrument manufacturer in the industry supporting its own research facility. Oticon product range consists of hearing aids, iatrical diagnosis apparatus, aids audition facility, FM language training system, personal communication equipment, computer software and electronic cochlea, covering the whole audiology field. Currently, owning more than 2000 highly skilled employees around the world, Oticon's hearing aids are sold in more than 100 countries to thousands of hearing impaired every day to help them to live the life they want with the hearing they have.
Because of heavy competition and the changeable external and internal environment, nearly each company has tough period, Oticon also doesn't make an exception. What worth pursued is how does it thrive on chaos by applying suitable HR Practice to facilitate Business Strategy.
Many commentators figured out that organizational change is a strategic imperative, which means that major or radical changes on organizational structure and culture, job contents, careers of workforce are required in order to deal with some predictable or unpredictable pressures happening in the wider social, economic, political and technological environment. (Buchanan, 2004)
So when Kolind (CEO of Oticon) realized that cost-cutting and productivity-enhancing strategies would not be enough to make Oticon win over other strong competitors, he established famous "spaghetti organization", which also could be called as project-based organization or dis-organization, knowledge-based, networked, with no formal hierarchical structure, without traditional management positions, lack of formal grooming high-fliers program.
A reward system is designed to attract, retain employees, and motivate them to improve their contributions to the whole organizational performance. When the reward system is applied within an organization, it usually expresses information about what is crucial to the organization, thus it should be compatible with the organization's culture and its designed way of working. Generally speaking, re-designing an organization's structure would result in changing its culture, people's behaviors, attitudes and values to the work. Therefore, in order to guarantee the organization would operate with high efficiency as expected, CEO or HR department definitely should make sure that the reward system could support these changes. (WMG, OPP module, 2005)
As to Oticon, it has changed from a traditional functional organization to "spaghetti organization". Hence, its new reward scheme should be compatible with this kind of rather flat and flexible structure (see table 1).
After reform, Oticon's employees have more responsibilities to look forward to and not only think unthinkable but also make the new idea doable and deliverable. The new Oticon provides ample opportunities to highly involve its successful crux: People. All in all, Oticon is the typical representative who implemented successful transformation based on the optimum application of organizational behavior and human resource management theories.