Some problems within Pluto Telecommunications stem from the rapid growth experienced by the company over the last year. As a result communication has deteriorated between the three departments and as Ms Tsang says "they are actually working against each other". The manifestations of these problems are lost orders and an increased number of complaints.
Ms Tsang is faced by 3 department subcultures which show few signs of integration and operate more as individual groups within the company. This has led to inefficient inter-department communication. Each department has its own aims, time scales and motivations which do not coincide with the other departments. Another problem facing Ms Tsang is the behaviour of her department directors and their inability to voice their honest opinions. Ms Tsang's leadership is also an issue for her to address as she has failed to coordinate her three departments and directors effectively.
Pluto Telecommunications can be analysed using the SOGI model for levels of analysis; Societal, Organisational, Group and Individual. Pluto will be analysed at all but Societal level.
In the short run it is important for the 3 department directors to voice their concerns about the corrective action required, albeit in a constructive and appropriate way (alternative 2). Short term it would be possible to introduce regular meetings to facilitate communications between departments and resolve conflicts (alternative 7).
Long term the culture of the organisation should become more involvement orientated with the view to integrate the 3 departments more effectively (alternative 4) resulting in more effective communications and better working relations. Over a length of time a greater emphasis should be placed on intrinsic motivation of employees, making sure there is greater feedback and that clear achievable goals are set for everyone (alternative 5). The introduction of organisation wide rewards may encourage greater team work. The current organisational structure should remain and combined with the recommended actions should become more effective.
The issue of different time motivations stems from the nature of the work that each department does and would be difficult to change. It is therefore important that Pluto concentrates on making sure each department understand the other departments' time constraints. Ideally all departments would be based at the same location but the financial implications should be considered before any decision was made.
Company directors meeting to voice concerns and recommendations. This may take days.
Implement weekly meetings and quarterly reviews involving directors and company managers. This may take a couple of weeks.
Introduce an involvement culture. Use interdepartmental social events, team building exercises etc to encourage interaction. This may take several months and in involve a small cost.
Alter the reward systems and provide more feedback. This may take several months but costs may be cut due to tailor made rewards.