Company U's aim was to achieve sufficient sales in the Sonite market during the initial periods to produce 2 Vodites as quickly as possible. We aimed to be first to market with a Vodite product to benefit from the advantages of this policy; "A sometimes insurmountable advantage gained by the first significant company to move into a new market" Our Sonite products were not ideally targeted to any segments and thus other factors of the marketing mix where to used to drive sales.
The company position will be analysed mainly on the basis of 4 Key Performance Indicators; Market Share, Retail Sales, Contribution and Shareholder Value (SPI and ROI).
Porter stated that 'The essence of formulating competitive strategy is relating a company to its environment'. Marketing strategy can also be defined as "one that encompasses the selection and analysis of a target market and the creation and maintenance of an appropriate marketing mix that will satisfy those people in the target market". What stage products are in the product life cycle, the financial resources available, strength competition and market position both short and long term are important considerations. A SWOT analysis of Company U is useful starting block.
SWOT analysis tells us that a strategy is required that will improve the saleability of Sonites and guard against threats in the Vodite market. The 'marketing mix' popularly known as the 4 P's; product, price, promotion and place, will be the framework for strategy development.
Our behaviour and rationale for decisions evolved as we further understood the tools at our disposal and enhanced our knowledge of effective marketing. The following lessons were learned.
By retail market share we started as the 3 rd ranked company and finished as the 2 nd ranked. We aimed to be first to market for Vodites with the knowledge that "To lead the market you must take risks and make competitors follow". By concentrating efforts on Vodites, Sonite sales suffered. We have a strategy improve Sonite sales through better segment targeting (a new product) and product modification. We aim to ensure that the marketing mix we deploy is continually up-dated in order to serve customers' changing needs and differing growth rates of target segments. Figure 12 shows our aim of better market segmentation.
I would like to thank my project team for their excellent work and thank our shareholders for their continued support in our company.