CFS faces an increasingly competitive and sophisticated market place. Pressure has been growing to reduce prices in order to maintain market share but this has affected profit margins. To overcome these pressures and to remain competitive the Operations Director has proposed further restructuring of the company. This report has been instigated by the Board of Directors to investigate the proposals outlined by the Operations Director. The report will provide a thorough analysis of these proposals and outline how the project will be implemented, controlled and reviewed. Recommendations will be suggested at the end with more detailed justification provided in the main body of text.
Stakeholders are those who have an interest in a project. They may be few (e.g. a University assignment) or numerous (e.g. building a new hospital Good management of project stakeholders is important because "if stakeholder management is undertaken successfully, the project will run more smoothly" The expectations of different stakeholders may vary but will also change with time.
The stakeholder groups in this project are as follows. High Street Agents who would welcome a "much closer working relationship" and "more effective service". Trade Unions, who will want to protect the interest of the workers, e.g. pay v work load. Thirdly, external customers who would like a "more personal and effective service". IT Employees - Responsible for implementing new IT services. CFS Insurance Shareholders who will want to see a positive return on the project Operations Department Employees - directly affected by the reorganisation. The Operations Director - Has overall responsibility for the department. HR Department Employees - Responsible for training of employees. Wider society should be considered as they will benefit from increased taxes on potentially greater profits made by CFS, should the project be a success.
For effective management of each of the stakeholder groups, their interest / stake and influence on the project must be ascertained. This will enable the suitable method of communication with that stakeholder group to be used. Figure 1 illustrates the grouping of the stakeholders by their interest and influence. From this is can be determined how best to communication with them. High street agents, trade unions, shareholders and IT employees all have low stakes in the project and have little influence. To best manage this group, informing is required. External customers have high influence (they can shop elsewhere for insurance) as do HR as they will perform the training. Fully informing is appropriate here. The operations department employees have a high stake in the project and because their power is low it is best to consult with them. Finally the operations director has both high interest and influence in the project so should be invited to participate. There is no need to communicate explicitly with society on this project.
It must be clear what the project is going to do, how it is going to do it and how the outcome of the project will be measured. After the implementation the project should also be evaluated to see if what was promised in the beginning was actually delivered.
The definition of the CFS Insurance project is 3 fold: aim, objectives and evaluation. The project aim defines what the project will do and why. The project aim is:
The objectives are a more detailed set of statements of what the project is going to deliver. The objectives should be SMART Evaluation will allow for further improvement and also helps to ascertain if objectives set out at the beginning were indeed achieved. Figure 2 shows the objectives and evaluation criteria for the project.
Each evaluation criteria has been chosen after considering the pros and cons. For example although there are drawbacks to using a mystery shopper for evaluating objective 8, it was felt that this was the most appropriate method for objectively evaluating how staff work. Using a focus group to evaluate objective 9 allows participants to interact and 'bounce ideas off each other', and also covers many staff quickly. However it was recognised that there are drawbacks to this technique; that individual views may get suppressed and skilful facilitation is required for the method to be successful. For objectives 5-7, the evaluation criteria are an objective measurement of the parameter. Therefore the conclusion drawn is founded on fact, and not opinion.
Moving forward, the project scope should be considered to ensure that it is made clear what the project will and will not cover. The project will not allow selling through the internet, team leaders will not be responsible for setting sales targets for their team, insurance premiums will not automatically decrease as a result of the project, HSAs won't be forced to upgrade their computer systems and savings in operational costs won't automatically be used to increase pay / bonuses.
Inherent in every project is uncertainty and risk. To fully understand and manage risk one must first understand what underpins risk, uncertainty. Uncertainty relates to "possible variations in factors related directly or indirectly to a project that may affect project performance" Risk is the resultant deviation from the planned outcome of the project Two methods that are useful for determining uncertainties are the Failure Mode and Effects Approach (FMEA) and the Cause-and-Effect Approach. The FMEA approach works from cause to effect which is naturally the way things occur whereas the Cause-and-Effect approach is places a stronger influence on the operating objectives and works from effect to cause. Because FMEA considers the effects on project outcome and overall organisation performance this is the most appropriate approach for this project. Using FMEA, the uncertainties and variations (risks) for implementation and operation can be described and a probability of occurrence and level of impact assessed. This is normally done on an arbitrary scale (e.g. 1-10). Figure 3 summarises this, where levels of impact and probability has been converted to a simple low, medium or high scale for ease of understanding. This all facilitates the rating of significance of the risk.
Having established the uncertainties inherent in the CFS insurance project, the next step is to classify the uncertainties which will facilitate the development of a strategy to deal with the risks to the projects success. Using the impact / probability matrix (Wheeler 2005, page 45) each uncertainty factor can be rated in terms of its significance to the project. For avoidance of doubt the levels of significance must be defined.     This is all summarised in figure 3 below.
Once the risks have been established and their significance to the project Broadly speaking there are five strategies for managing risk. Avoidance - reject the project outright. Mitigate - put in place a strategy to reduce the risk to the project. Risk sharing - by way of a strategic alliance or through contractual terms. Allowing - accepting that the negative outcome may occur but preparing a contingency, setting aside extra resources. Ignorance - take no special action.
To decide which strategy is appropriate the level of impact and the probability of occurrence must be taken into account. The level of impact / probability of occurrence matrix (Wheeler, 2005, page 46) may be used to devise a strategy to best manage each risk. The risk of savings in operational costs not being realised has a high impact because this is one of the key drivers for the project, and is a fundamental operational objective. It has a medium probability so a strategy of avoidance should be adopted. However as this is an integral part of the project this is not practical, so instead mitigation should be adopted. CFS must ensure that the HR department implements the necessary training, and introduce a feedback system whereby the employees can comment on their competency in a certain area.
The risk of increased training costs (due to resistance to the project) has a medium impact because reducing costs is an important objective of the project. It has a medium probability, and as such mitigation or sharing strategy should be used. Involving employees in the project at an early point and allowing them to have their opinions heard may prevent this. However I also feel a strategy of allowing, and thereby setting aside some contingency funds for this eventuality is also appropriate. The risk of the project being delayed is due to several uncertainties and so mitigation and allowing is suitable here. If reorganisation and employee training takes longer, contingency time should be set aside. To combat complications with connecting PCs to CFS mainframe, tests should be carried out as early and possible and research should be carried out to understand the technicalities.
The risk of a recession and a decrease in revenue demands aspects of allowing, by conducting sensitivity analysis to see how profit is affected by particular drops in sales, and ignoring as there is little that can be done by CFS to prevent a recession. Finally the risk of increased PC / software prices, and therefore cost to the project should be managed through allowing. Sensitivity analysis should be conducted to see how the project cost is affected by a certain increase in PC / software prices. A small contingency fund should also be set aside.
The four stage Plans should be prepared prior to execution, with agreed measurements of performance. During the execution progress should be monitored, followed by review of actual versus target performance.
Planning and control will be exercised at three levels. At a strategic level control should come from the operations director who has the authority to allocate resources. At an operational level the project manager or operations manager assumes responsibility and with their team, provides more depth and detail than at a strategic level. At the day-to-day level detailed plans covering specific areas of work are laid out by those carrying out specific work, including HR staff, IT employees and the operations department employees.
The nature of the review periods and the project work structure must be defined. It must be taken into account how much the project may drift from its course when setting the review periods. CFS should conduct operational reviews more frequently than strategic reviews as conducting frequent strategic reviews is more difficult because it is hard to get the key stakeholders together, as the demands on their time are often greater. The project should build in the option for the project manager to call review meetings as this will make the project team more flexible to changing circumstances. To make the project easier to control, the WBS outlined in section E.9, should be used. By breaking the larger project into smaller work packages Some packages will span the length of the project (e.g. Employee Training) whilst some will occur for a shorter period of time (e.g. Software Installation). Each work package should be reviewed at suitable intervals and after completion, so a comparison with the progress of the overall project can be made.
To ensure effective planning CFS should use a combination of planning techniques. A Gantt chart although limited, provides a good visual overview of the activities contained in the project and is a starting point for resource planning. Activities are positioned on the chart with their duration (and sometimes resources required) running on the horizontal axis. This can provide a project manager with a brief snapshot of how long the project should take and what resources are required at any given moment in time.
As Gantt charts become too large with many activities and do not show logical relationships the use of Network Analysis will provide a more detailed view of the project. Network Analysis illustrates the project activities as nodes interconnected by logical links. By working through a forward and backward schedule the project manager will be able to calculate the critical path. This is useful because it shows the manager which activities have zero slack The activities on the critical path must be controlled most carefully to ensure the project is not delayed. At a higher level CFS should also investigate the option of activity crashing. This involves allocating extra resource to reduce the duration of certain activities with the aim of reducing the critical path, and thus the overall project completion time.
As important as controlling the progress of the project is controlling the expenditure. Financial planning will enable CFS to calculate the total project cost, identify when cash is need during the project, decide who has the authority to spend funds and provide a framework for control.
The first stage is to decide against what financial parameters the project will be measured. Commonly this will be cost and "earned value". Wheeler defines this as "the value of work actually completed" In some situations income may be generated during the execution phase (e.g. increased sales due to the better service offered by staff as a result of training) and future commitments in the project should also be considered (e.g. future orders for parts). Management must then establish when costs and income are recognised, and at what point in time commitments are made.
When dealing with the costs of the project CFS should be aware of what type of cost are relevant. As the project is internal and is serving an internal customer (reorganisation of the operations department), only the direct costs of the project need consideration. Overheads will be recovered through the service provided by CFS, by being passed onto external customers.
As the project is broken down into work packages, it complements nicely to break the project budget into time periods, thus adopting a complex financial system of control. At the end of each period performance may be assessed and reviewed. Although a cost is incurred for setting up this type of system it will allows tighter financial control for the project manager. The project manager must also be aware of the structure of the costs. As overheads are to be ignored, the project manager must decide whether to treat the cost as one direct cost, or break it down further e.g. direct labour, direct materials or direct expenses. The more detailed the breakdown of costs the tighter control can be exerted but this will may prove longer and more costly.
The final decision that the project manager must make regards whether the budget is fixed or revisable. Having a fixed budget allows the management to more accurately forecast the company's cash flow and better invest other funds. However having a revisable budget allows a company more flexibility in the event of cost changes. As there is some technology involved in the change at CFS it would be prudent for them to adopt a revisable budget structure should unforeseen circumstances arise.
Having adopted a complex system of control the project manager must refine the details for planning and control. The projected expenditure on the project will be expressed at periodic intervals throughout the project and also for each work package Budgetary control should be exercised by measuring cost to date and adding this to predicted future cost to provide a comparison with the project budget. The project manager should also measure the earned value and compare this with the actual cost to date. This is important because a project may look like it is running over budget but if the earned value equals the cost to date then the project will at least be running on schedule, that is what should have been achieved, has been achieved. Appraisal of the project should be carried out for each work package (ensuring tighter control) and at the end of the project.
The project manager must prepare a budget for the project and be aware of cashflow issues that may arise, so as to not bring the company into cashflow difficulties. The Gantt chart is useful for seeing the activities of the project, from which each activity must be assigned to a work package. Costs for each activity must be calculated once the direct and indirect costs are known, which will then allow the project manager to determine the cost of each work package for each period. The project manager can then establish the overall project cost.
This report makes the following recommendations to the board. Further reasoning is provided in the main body of text.
The brief aim of the project is to bring
The estimated time for project completion is
CFS must manage risks through strategies of
The project should be implemented at a
A
A
A
The impact of a successful project will be positive for the company and position it more competitively in the market. However it was assumed that should the project fail, the company would continue to operate as a going concern.
A successful project is one that involves not only on time and on budget implementation but also thorough review. Developing the process and improving project performance is fundamental to doing it better next time. This involves some reflection on the techniques adopted during the execution, and understanding mistakes made during the process. It would be na
Thorough risk management is a fundamental part of project management. The risk strategies matrix is useful for determining which strategy is appropriate for the type of risk. However the tool is limited as for medium impact / probability of occurrence and high impact / probability of occurrence risks the suggested strategy is avoidance, and this is not always appropriate or indeed feasible. Limitations of this particular matrix are in many ways limitations of any simple decision matrix. When situations aren't 'black or white', or there is some ambiguity, the tool loses its' effectiveness.
Planning and control is important to a projects' success. One method to aid this is the Critical Path Method (CPM) which has been described in the main body. This method has origins in decision (discrete) mathematics, and is one I have been familiar with since studying at A-Level. Its strengths are that is provides logical analysis that is lacking from a Gantt chart. Given estimates of activity duration, it allows a project manager to easily establish the time taken for the project, based on activity duration lengths. However despite its strengths CPM is by no means a perfection solution, and does not provide a good visual representation of the project. "Why should there be need for other methods for Project Management to replace or maybe enhance CPM? Self-evidently, CPM frequently does not work" Sainsbury's recent cancellation of a multi billion pound contract with Accenture shows that even companies who devote their profession to project management can get it wrong. This suggests "either the methods being used for project management or their application or both must be at fault"
There are several issues that demonstrate the problems with CPM. All goals are based on estimates, which by definition will contain uncertainties. Activities in network diagrams often display latest start times, and if for example cash flow pressure demand that projects start at the latest time, then there are more activities on the critical path. This decreases the likelihood of completing the project on time and may cause the project manager to lose focus. A differing approach which provides a possible solution to the problems of CPM is the Theory of Constraints (TOC).
The crux of this, highlighted by Maylor is "A fundamental of this is to manage systems by focusing on the constraint" The TOC approach identifies a constraint (critical path, critical resources), exploits the constraint, subordinates everything else to the constraint, elevates the constraint and then repeats the process. Alongside this is a shift in estimating techniques which calculates on activity times only and emphasises that 50 per cent off activities will finish early and 50 per cent will finish late. Overall TOC constructs a critical chain (as opposed to a critical path) analogous to "a relay race - where the runners are lined up ready to receive the baton before continuing with their leg of the race" The benefits are that early finishes for activities are encouraged and the stigma of a late finish is removed. This also creates a more active role for the project manager.
Although an esteemed discipline in its own right, Project Management impacts on all organisations from hospitals to blue chip companies. One area that incorporates Project Management deeply in its thinking is Information Systems. Many principles of Project Management are transferable to techniques such as the Systems Development Lifecycle (SDLC). Piloting, risk management and the parallel implementation approach are fundamental to SDLC. With greater demands placed on managers whether in business, not for profit organisations or government institutions, project management is a skill that is quickly becoming a prerequisite for success.