Following group consultation with FamRelief (item 1 in the appendix), this report will further analyse the organisation by evaluation of SSM Mode 1 components, and consideration of analyses 2 and 3 of SSM Mode 1. The group process will also be considered.
Acknowledging the limitations of Hard Systems Methodology, Checkland developed SSM that would operate as a tool to solve more ill-structured organisational problems. Figure 1 outlines the basis of SSM Mode 1.
Mingers and Taylor (1992) suggested that the strengths of SSM are backed by empirical support, and Jackson and Keys (1984) argued that SSM is better able to deal with and solve problems than other systems based techniques although an SSM approach involves considerable involvement at the beginning and later stages. The 7 stages are explained with references to FamRelief where appropriate, below.
Social Systems Analysis or Analysis 2 has developed from work by Vickers (1965) and further by Checkland and Casar (1986).
Also regarded as the "Political System", Analysis 3 considers the politics and power that exists in an organisation. Checkland (1986) said that any human situation will have a political dimension.
The main benefit of group work was the syndication of different views and individuals knowledge. It was also beneficial having students studying CBS and Management Science as we were able to combine knowledge of IT and IS, with more specific business skills such as report writing and organisational analysis.
As a group we assigned individuals to the different tasks for interviewing the FamRelief individuals and then to work on particular sections of the assignment. We worked hard and the assignment was brought together and submitted on time.
Important lessons were learnt: regular clear communication within the group, all members attended meetings, knowing what was required before and after meetings and creating a dynamic where all members felt at ease to contribute was all important. Away from the group, effective use of email and phone communication was vital. We also learned that we worked better in a group session when it was purely a case of syndication of work rather than commenting on the work. We squandered time trying to complete each stage of the assignment as a group.
Belbin's 9 team roles framework (1996) shows that our 6 members displayed characteristics of these roles. Initially I occupied the role of a co-ordinator and then at the end a completer. Other members with greater IS experience took on the role of specialist, while one individual was good at averting friction and calming the waters, thus the role of a teamworker.
A rich picture of the group process is attached which illustrates what we did well and poorly as a group. Clock faces indicate where time was note used efficiently, and crossed sword indicate conflict.