Costcutter Supermarkets Group Ltd was founded in 1986 and is a group that operates franchises of small supermarkets. It has 1200 stores across the UK, one of which is The University of  campus store (the focus of this assignment and from now referred to as 'the store'). The store was opened in 1998, employs 30 staff in total with 2 full time managers and has a yearly turnover of 4.1million. It occupies a space of 5000sqft, with further storage of 500sqft. The university provides a target market of 15,536 students and 4,354 staff during term time, with conference delegates and staff the target market out of term time. The store supplies household names in conjunction with 270 own brand Costcutter lines, a total of 5,297 product lines. It operates by outsourcing 56% of product lines through its strategic alliance with Nisa Today's, the UK's largest buying group for independent retail and wholesale companies. The other 44% of product lines come from 48 small suppliers with whom Costcutter have developed individual relationships.
The 'corporate strategy' is based on four principles. They aim to provide grocery-led neighbourhood stores, adopt a competitive pricing policy, a strong promotional programme and a product range that includes a substantial grocery provision. The 'business strategy' for the store adopts these principles but adapts them to fit in with location specific factors, such as varying levels of demand, a large ethnic population and high competition from nearby stores. It does not compete directly with companies such as Tesco (at the nearby Cannon Park Shopping Centre) on price, but aims to offer availability of products at key times, with niche items such as Halal products and food items from many ethnic origins.
All operations require a tightly defined set of objectives that relate specifically to the simple aim of satisfying customer needs. The five performance objectives are; cost, dependability, flexibility, quality. For operations to excel a company must assess their relative importance; a polar diagram of the store's performance objectives is shown right.
Dependability is doing things on time for customers in line with their expectations. From interviews with the store manager this was the most important performance objective to Costcutter. Specifically this means that products should be on the shelves, not sat in storage, and are available at times when demand is particularly high (e.g. lunch time and straight after lectures). To Costcutter dependability is an 'order winning factor' as it "directly and significantly contributes to winning business". The location of the operation to its market is a sustainable competitive advantage over its rivals but to maximise this, products must be in stock to satisfy demand. The store assesses this issue through the staff job design, where it is emphasized that all staff should constantly review the availability of products on shelves and take responsibility for ensuring shelves are always stocked. Management endeavour to ensure that the store doesn't run out of stock, so that products are readily available. This is all possible due to a flexible ordering system where the majority of products are ordered from Nisa Today's via an automated IT ordering system on a daily basis. This uses check-out data to calculate the amount of new stock needed to replenish stock levels back to the threshold level set by the manager. The manager may alternate these levels according to demand variation. Stock levels of products from smaller are monitored manually and staff are encouraged to make the manager aware when levels are running low, all contributing to more reliability of stock on the shelves, thus increased dependability.
The stock system is heavily reliant on the suppliers to deliver their own service effectively and last year a fire at the warehouse of the bread supplier resulted in no bread being available at the store for two days. A better contingency plan must be considered in light of that incident. The store must also deliver their service in a competitive time, ensuring products are easy to find and queuing times do not detract customers. Finally, dependability meant having regular and reliable opening hours so customers could depend on and trust the store to provide goods for them consistently. Although different for term time and vacation time, a reflection of the change in demand, the opening hours stay consistent and the store remains open 52 weeks a year. The design of the store, with such small storage facilities drives the dependability as the key performance objective. From an 'operations resources perspective' it is not seen as a 'resource constraint' but a capability to drive more efficient performance.
Quality was the next most important objective and the store manager emphasised the need to provide a safe and clean environment within the store, well trained and helpful staff and high quality consumer goods that meet expectations. Quality can be considered a 'qualifying factor' as the performance in this objective must be above a threshold for customers to consider the store. By stocking branded products they offer a standardised quality which customer will have experienced before e.g. Hovis bread. Annual assessments of the store's image and dcor, along with daily stock checks (especially of the perishable goods) and regular cleaning of floors allow the store to meet these environmental objectives. Fridge equipment is hired from a local contractor and this gives the store a clear contingency plan when equipment fails; they can just get the contractor to deliver a new piece of equipment (under the contract) rather than have to invest heavily themselves and so frozen and chilled products are always in good condition. An internal staff training program allows the manager to ensure the staff quality is high and they deal with customers in a courteous and efficient manner. Meeting customers' product quality expectations depends heavily upon the allegiances with suppliers. Through the store's allegiance and developed relationships with smaller suppliers they stock quality products at a competitive price. Finally, unlike a lot of businesses the store doesn't have a direct way of monitoring customer satisfaction (e.g. Feedback Form). Instead the manager monitors the level of complaints made and asses each complaint individually, allowing him to highlight areas for improvement.
Flexibility is being able to change some aspect of the operation in some manner, perhaps how it operates or when it operates. By taking a 'market perspective' of strategy and understanding its customers, the store performs 'mix flexibility' in providing Halal, and products from ethnic sources to satisfy a mixed ethnic market. The store performs 'volume flexibility' by stocking in anticipation of demand e.g. increasing levels of alcoholic beverages in the last few weeks of term 3 once exams have finished. This flexibility requires primary support from its suppliers (Nisa Today's and a series of smaller suppliers) and through its flexible re-stocking system and Supply Chain Management (SCM). The store is flexible in 3 other ways; price setting, supplier relationships and storage/stock. Prices are high enough to cover costs and run the store at the profit, but by matching the 'business strategy' to the 'corporate strategy' prices change as part of a strong promotional programme. The restricted storage space makes a daily delivery system with Nisa Today's and the smaller suppliers very important in meeting demand. This gives the store great flexibility in meeting their overall objective of providing product range that includes a substantial grocery provision, while giving them scope to vary product ranges when consumer tastes change. Finally the flexible re-stocking system (discussed in the dependability section) allows the store to cut down stock levels in the vacation periods when demand lowers, in order to cut down on overall costs and wastage levels. Flexibility can be seen as a 'less important factor' by its worth to the store's competitiveness, good performance in flexibility supports dependability which is an order winning factor.
Speed is the time between customers requesting products or services and when they are received. For the store, it is in terms of customers getting in the store, selecting products and buying them. Simply put the more customers Costcutter can get through the store per hour the more revenue they will generate. If customers expect a short time to get in and out of the store, it makes the experience of shopping easier and more enjoyable. By reducing the throughput time of each customer flow is increased, blockages and bottlenecks are reduced and queues decrease. Using 'business intelligence' Costcutter know that the average spend is 5 and consists of mainly snack purchases, thus the design of the store is such to aid speed. Large areas are devoted to sandwiches, drinks and confectionary away from tills where queues may appear, thus increasing flow and reducing speed. Clear signage indicates what is in each aisle so a customer is able to select their desired items swiftly. The creation of two more tills and guidelines as to when opening a new till is appropriate facilitate a quick service was available. The store has the necessary equipment to process orders using debit or credit cards quickly making rush hour surges easier to cope with. The layout of the store also aims to provide the customer with easy access routes to enable their visit to the store to be hassle free.
Cost objective is maybe the least important in relative terms to the store but remains essential. Cost is a 'qualifying factor' because despite the convenient location, charging high prices may make customer travel the extra distance to local rivals Tesco. Management appreciate that they cannot adopt a 'cost leadership' strategy but they achieve reasonable prices through its supplier network and by setting a recommended retail price it maintains reasonable sales volume and profit margins. Trying to compete on price may put the store under more pressure at rush hour times, ultimately resulting in a negative outcome. The highest cost associated with the operation is staffing and it is important that there is a balance made between the physical benefits of having extra staff working and the financial sacrifices made to obtain them. At the moment, with many students acting as part-time staff members, the manager has created a flexible workforce to meet the physical and financial demands of the store. Considering the outlay on the new till system, the store is under pressure in the short run to make it worthwhile through improved service levels given to the customer (e.g. reduced queuing times).
In order to increase flexibility and the throughput time in peak periods, Costcutter should adopt a more mixed approach by introducing cells into its layout. As lunchtime is the key peak period, all sandwiches and lunchtime snacks and drinks should be located together with a specific till at the disposal of lunchtime customers, in essence making the sandwich area a "shop-within-a-shop".