There has been a drastic restructuring of employment patterns in UK organizations in the last twenty years. The destabilization of international markets, leading to raised levels of competition coupled with social, economic and technological changes in Britain's product and capital markets during the past quarter century have pushed employers towards the emerging idea of the 'flexible firm'(Kallenberg,2001)in the new century. Flexibility in labour use can be defined as reformation of work and employment structures with the aim of increasing efficiency and reducing costs. (Sheridan and Conway, 2001, 5)
The purpose of this essay is to evaluate the importance of the employment of flexibility in labour use in terms of employer's objectives and benefits secured. It also analyses the possible internal and external constraints faced by organizations in the utilization of flexible labour practices.
The first part of the essay enlists the various forms of flexibility, and focuses in detail on the interplay between numerical and functional flexibility using Atkinson's Core-Periphery model and evaluates its feasibility in practice. The second part explains the pressures for flexibility and the different objectives and advantages that employers aspire to attain through the employment of different forms of labour flexibility. The third part of the essay examines the constraints faced by employers in the practical implementation of flexible labour patterns in the UK and how the benefits of flexible labour utilization to employers (discussed in the second part) are eroded in the view of these constraints.
The forms of flexibility in labour use depend on the employer's want of either:
Variable labour inputs, in terms of numbers employed (Numerical Flexibility) or hours worked (Temporal Flexibility) or
Change in the tasks and skills of employees for better and increased labour utilization (Functional Flexibility)
(Week 5, Lecture notes)
Each of these is illustrated as follows:
Flexibility in labour use in the UK thus occupies an important part of organizational change in the new century due to the varied benefits it can potentially offer employers in terms of competitive costs, efficiency and operational flexibility. We observe that organizational goals influence the adoption of a particular form of labour flexibility since the employment of different forms of flexibility can lead to different ends.
Of all the constraints faced in the implementation of flexible labour patterns, the strongest constraint is the recent emergence of a vast pile of legal regulations for the non-standard workforce. It erodes the benefits that an employer seeks to accrue through the implementation of flexibility in labour use. It is indeed ironic to note that these regulations whilst working towards the increased welfare of temporary and part-time workers in turn jeopardize their opportunities to employment. If these regulations become firmly implemented and practiced in UK enterprises, then the future for the employment of flexible labour patterns appears obscure.