The legal status of trade unions in the United Kingdom was established by a Royal Commission in 1867, which agreed that the establishment of the unions was to the benefit both employers and employees. Since then, unions have been upheld as the traditional promoters of justice and fairness at the workplace.
Trade union membership experienced a meteoric rise from late 1968 to 1979(Blyton and Turnbull, 2004, p.139) However from 1979 till date unionism has been declining progressively.
The steady and continuous disintegration of collective organization in British workplaces since 1979 in terms of union membership, union density and collective bargaining coverage has been remarkable. Union membership shattered from its peak at 12.6 million in 1979 to 7.1 million in 1998, a significant reduction in membership density of the employed workforce from 56% to 30%.( Terry, 2003,p.459). Similarly, collective bargaining coverage fell drastically from around 80% of the workforce to a mere over a third in 1998. (Heery, Kelly and Waddington, 2000, p.79)
Decline has been the steepest in the private sector where membership losses ran from more than half in 1980 to as low as 19% in late 1999.The public sector recorded a fall from 84% in 1980 to 60% in 1999. (Terry,2003,p.459).Thus public sector aggregate membership is greater than that of the private sector with 3-employees-in-5 being members in the public sector but the corresponding figure for the private sector is fewer than 1-in-5.(Metcalf,2005,p.3)
These figures are disappointing for those who view strength of trade unions as an indicator of economic and industrial democracy. The recent years have witnessed the erosion of union influence over the government and employers, their diminished ability to attract members, financial crisis within unions and the shift from representative to direct voice mechanisms in nearly all new workplaces.
All this has led to the belief that decline in collective representation is now irreversible. (Metcalf, 2005, p.28).However there are some who still remain positive about the opportunities for union revitalization. (Blyton and Turnbull, 2004, p.169)
The purpose of this essay is to arrive at a possible conclusion on this debate of union revitalization by examining the various factors influencing it. From my study of the trend in collective representation, I would be steering the essay towards the provision of evidence which establishes that a reverse in the declining trend of trade unionism is unlikely. To predict the future of trade unions, it is essential to understand what led to their decline in the first place.
Thus in the first part of my essay ,I would be outlining the factors that shaped union decline since 1979.I aim to then consider the current scenario in terms of the legislative, compositional, sectoral and organizational constraints facing trade unions today. In the last section I would focus on the strategies employed by unions for revival and their potential for success in the future. Based on all these, my conclusion would be derived on the future of trade unionism in Britain.
Several explanations have been put forth to account for the decline of trade unions since 1979.Each of these can be studied as follows:
The two main union strategies employed by unions in an attempt to revitalize are 'Social Partnership' and 'Organizing' respectively.
The future health of trade unionism rests on securing two goals, namely,
(
(Blyton and Turnbull, 2004, p.137)
Thus trade unions have to design an agenda that will appeal both to the interests of the employees and thus boost membership and to those of the employers to gain recognition as bargaining agents.
As far as recruiting new members is concerned, whether trade unions will be able to establish a foothold in the private sector service firms and non-union greenfield sites through strategies of organizing and partnership employed by them still remains dubious due to the various constraints prevalent in the employment of the same. The capacity of unions to develop 'organizational flexibility' (Taylor, 2001, p.12) to attract the new category of non-standard and contingent workers still remains unproven. The continuing rise of never membership across all segments of the workforce renders it difficult for unions to know where to focus their new recruitment and organizing strategies. (Bryson and Gomez, 2005)
Employer recognition of trade unions as bargaining agents has been extremely limited, especially due to the exclusion of small private sector firms from the ERA 1999.Presently only an estimated one third of all Britain's employees have their pay and conditions determined by collective bargaining which contrasts with 70% in 1989 (Taylor,2001,p.9)
However even in workplaces where unions have managed to retain an institutional presence, the Workplace IRS reveals that it amounts to a 'hollow shell' marked by limited representation, bargaining coverage and influence over management policies (Heery, Kelly and Waddington, 1)
The legislation enacted by the Labour government has also failed to bring about any improvement in the declining union membership. Although unionism still remains pre-dominant in the public sector, the future of trade unions depends on securing a foothold in the private services where most of the jobs are now being created. Thus trade unionism in Britain still faces many insurmountable challenges which makes a significant revival in collective representation back to the levels of the 1970s when an estimated 58% of members were union members most improbable. As Metcalf suggests, perdition is indeed more likely than resurgence. (Metcalf, 2005, p.28)