The development of feminist thought and action in Japan is distinct from that of its emergence in the West, more specifically within the United States and Britain. Though influenced by Western politics, the development of feminism in Japan was also initiated by numerous other social and political factors that affected the political climate at that specific time and place. Adherence to Confucian ideologies severely restricted women within Japanese society, as well as subordinating the working classes and those not owning property. A growing political awareness and imperialist competition later led to the struggle for social reform, of which women were arguably at the forefront. This essay will deal with such social and political factors as these to account for the development of feminism in Japan.
The subordinate position of women within Japanese society came to be highlighted at the end of the nineteenth century, whereas previously notions of the 'natural inferiority of women' This had implications for the rights of women concerning property, marriage and divorce, amongst other issues. Adopting Chinese Confucian ethics, the Japanese sought to uphold and promote to younger generations the established patriarchy through regulating the autonomy and independence of women. This was achieved through the establishment of a patrilineal family system that demanded filial respect within the family, which was then reflected in the necessity for obedience to the head of state. This originated from the Confucian teaching that women were to be understood as yin, hence passive and in need of ruling by the male yang. This therefore left women no place to rule, either within the family or within the feudalistic structure prevailing in Japan at the time. This signalled 'a process of reform, modernisation and democratisation'. Western intellectuals linked the Japanese subordination of women to their weakness as a nation; a theory which was to be adopted by Japanese reformers such as those involved with the The Meiji Restoration was a more liberal form of government than had been in place previously and directly questioned the status of women, holding them to be 'at the centre of change' for reform of society and modernisation.
During the struggle for women's liberation, nationalism gained increasing interest and received considerably more attention from Japanese intellectuals, reformers and citizens. Feminism and nationalism were interlinked in discourses on social reform, though many believed the latter to take precedence through exploiting the former for its own aims, observing how the state 'moulded women's options and energies into national rather than individual goals'. However, the extent to which this was truly implemented is questionable. The fact that women were subordinate to men in Japanese society led many to suggest that this was the reason for Japan's economic and military weakness and consequent subordination as a nation to the West. That is not to say that women were independent of the state, in fact the issue of support for mothers was highly debated. There existed, to some extent, interdependency between women and the state, though Yosano Akiko, a prominent feminist at the time, argued that 'it is slave morality for women to be dependent on men because of their procreational role [and therefore women] must refuse dependency on the state for the very same reason'.
An additional factor affecting women was arguably their education. Debated by reformers, intellectuals and feminists, many continued to feel that this was a large
barrier to women's struggle. It was observed that the 'inadequacy of women's education reinforced their low status' In 1873, forty percent of boys and fifteen percent of girls attended primary school, though by 1910, nearly ninety nine percent of boys and ninety seven percent of girls were in this position. This originated from the emphasis placed by the both state and traditional society on the need to produce good wives and wise mothers, or
The issue of political awareness and activity held the key to women's liberation in Japan. Though reformist ideologies became increasingly more popular, legislation remained highly conservative, reflected in laws such as the 1890 Peace Preservation Law regulating 'subversive activities', a move largely aimed at feminists, and also within laws preventing women from attending political meetings. By 1878 the Movement had expanded membership to women, recognising them as 'a force to be mobilised', whereas they had previously been unconcerned with women's rights. This signified a large step forward in women's liberation and inspired numerous other women to act, including Fukuda Hideko. For example, the Tokyo Women's Reform Society was set up chiefly by middle class Christians and campaigned largely against social evils oppressing women, such as prostitution and concubinage.
Due to rapid industrialisation taking place in Japan as an attempt to keep up with Western capitalism and the newly-introduced free trade market, there ensued an influx of women into the labour force. Whilst in 1930 there were ten million female workers in Japan, by 1944 this figure had increased to thirteen million, as well as showing a marked decrease in the percentage of men in the workforce. However, women soon began to rise up against oppressive working conditions and laws, resulting in a strike in the Amamiya Silk Mill in Kofu. Here, as in other strikes taking place, women workers protested against worsening conditions of employment, wage decreases and abuse from male employers. A growing awareness of unfair working conditions led to a proliferation of working women's trade unions, thus granting improved representation and a medium through which they could make themselves heard in the rapidly modernising and industrialising nation. A further medium through which women gained representation was via the Eventually, the journal and members of the 'Bluestockings' group, such as Hiratsuka Raicho, came to question women's issues such as maternity provision, equal pay, the family system and marriage. The group demonstrably made the personal political and engaged many middle class Japanese women with the issue of their subordination, causing the government to enforce its termination in 1916.
Ultimately, it can be seen that a varied combination of changing social and political factors led to the development of feminism in Japan. Through increased political awareness and changing structures within the government, women were able to challenge their position for the first time. In the national struggle for increased economic and military power, gender identities were redefined in order to benefit the state. Women were arguably used in this process before being liberated themselves. Thereby, 'in the process of refusing subordinate status [as a nation], Japan constructed a new womanhood as a demonstration of its equality with the West and as a means of proving its civilised status'.