The aim of this experiment is to investigate the rate of a chemical reaction, and see how this is dependant on the temperature. The reaction to be studied is the oxidation of benzyl alcohol in an acid permanganate solution:
In this experiment benzyl alcohol and the acid ion are present in large excess, and therefore their concentrations can be assumed to remain constant. Thus the only measurable concentration is that of MnO
The rate of disappearance of MnO This will remove all permanganate, and thus stop the oxidation of benzyl alcohol. This will liberate a proportional quantity of iodine:
The number of moles of liberated Iodine can be found by titrating the solution against a solution of standardised sodium thiosulphate.
The concentration of MnO
When the concentration of MnO If the reaction is first order with respect to permanganate then when examining the graph with a "half-life" method it is found that consecutive half lives are the same, this is only true for a first order reaction. If the graph is a straight line, then this means the rate of reaction is zeroth order with respect to permanganate ion.
The overall rate equation can be written as:
Where a, b and c are orders of reaction with respect to their respective reagent and intergers to be determined. k is the equilibrium constant also to be determined.
In this experiment, the concentrations of benzyl alcohol and permanganate are in excess, and can be assumed to be constant, thus what is observed is first order-pseudo rate equation:
K
The order with respect to benzyl alcohol, and the acid are found from examining the results of different experiments. Once this has been done, the rate constant for the rate equation can be found by equating equations (4) and (5).
There is a variation of k with temperature, Arrhenius in 1889 found a relationship that governs this whole concept:
where A is the pre-exponential (frequency) factor, E is the activation energy and R the molar gas constant.
By manipulating this equation, it is possible (with different sets of values of T and k), to find A and E, by graphical means.
b
180.0 cm 20.0 cm These two conical flasks were placed into a thermostat bath (at 32.5
The potassium permanganate solution was then added to the benzyl alcohol solution. The stop clock was started immediately as these two solutions were mixed. A 10.0 cm To which 10 cm This was then titrated against standard sodium thiosulphate (1.953 x 10
This procedure was repeated every ten minutes, until the permanganate concentration decreased to 25% of starting concentration (
This experiment was then repeated for a thermostat bath at 27.5
Using Arrgenius' equation (6) it is possible to obtain the activation energy and pre-exponential factor of the reaction.
Data from other groups were collected, so that as many values of K and T could be used to calculate accurate values of A and E.
By taking natural logarithms of both sides of equation (6) gives:
The natural logarithm of each k value was calculated, as was 1/T. This would thus give a straight line graph, with gradient = E/R and intercept = lnA.
The values of k and T were manipulated so graph 5 could be plotted; these results are seen in table 7.
The equation generated from graph 5:
This means
Also
Thus
From the rate of the reaction, it is known that one molecule of acid, one molecule of benzyl alcohol, and one molecule of permanganate are involved in the mechanism of this reaction. Also the rate determining step is said to involve the breaking of a C-H bond.
The proposed mechanism is shown below:
Although Mn
In this experiment two values for a rate constant at different temperatures have been found; 0.000254 mol
The overall rate equation was deduced to be:
This reaction is overall third order, and first order with respect to acid, benzyl alcohol and permanganate. This lead to the conclusion that one of all these species was involved in the mechanism, instead as the stiochiometry equation (1) would lead us to believe. The proposed mechanism has the rate determining step breaking a C-H bond:
Some sets of K and T data were collated and produced a graph to find A and E using Arrhenius's equation (6). The values of A and E were found to be 248.152 and 20.08 KJ mol
The values of k obtained experimentally, appear to be quite low since it is said they should be between 0.1 - 0.4. This may be due to inaccuracy in the experiment, or poor experimental practise.
The major inaccuracy in this experiment may be due to the reagents (such as benzyl alcohol) are prone to breaking down over a period of time when heated. Thus the titration results could have been affected by this. The temperature of the thermostat baths were monitored for every titration and were completely consistent.
Also the graph generated by manipulating Arrhenius' equation is very unclear and the plots are very spatially distributed. Thus the equation of best fit is an estimate at best, implying results for A and E are inaccurate.