This report will examine; what contaminated land is and how it becomes contaminated, the impact contaminated land could have upon Spectrum Petrochemicals, what assessment methods need to be deployed to ensure our sites (oil refineries, tank farms and retail petrol stations) are not contaminated, and if they are some possible remedies.
The first major incident that highlighted how industry can contaminate land and how it should be cleaned up, was the "Love Canal Incident". This arose when the Hooker Chemical company purchased the incomplete canal and placed 21,000 tonnes of untreated organic waste substances into it. Subsequently the land was purchased and houses and a school were built upon it.
In the winter of 1977-1978, flooding caused the water table to rise bringing contamination from the chemical drums to the ground water level. This contaminated the land and the population of the Love Canal suffered severe sickness as a result. When the US Government declared a state of disaster it was found that many of the contaminating chemicals were toxic and carcinogenic.
It cost $250 million in total to remediate the contamination in the Love Canal region. The effect the contaminated land had was profound on the community it affected and provided a startling wake up call to industry, illustrating what could (in extreme cases) be the result of their contamination and the possible cost of remediation. This started a trend in industry taking a pro-active role. The incident set many precedents that were later laid down in UK law.
In the UK many Environmental acts have been passed, the most relevant to this report in 1995. In Part II of the 1995 Environment Act it states:
It is also defines:
The implications of this legislation and guidance over it are provided by the UK Environmental Agency:
This means there must be significant evidence that there is a) Significant contamination present (e.g. carcinogen Benzene), b) A receptor (e.g. Human), c) a pathway that links the two (e.g. water supply). For example benzene is released a by-product of a chemical process, this is released into the ground. Hypothetically it finds its way into ground water, which is then collected, processed and redistributed for drinking water- this is the pathway. The receptor is the person who drinks from a tap the benzene contaminated water.
The legislation is primarily administered by the local authorities, who identify which land is contaminated. The Environment Agency plays a secondary role by administrating "special sites", which are designated "special sites" by the local authority. Examples of special sites are: land owned by the Ministry of Defence and Petroleum refining sites.
If after investigation the relevant authority found contamination on a site, the authority would give a remediation notice. A remediation notice states what has to be done to remediate contamination and the time scale to do this in.
The outcome of the guidelines regarding the legislation is 1) the polluter pays for the clean up of contamination. 2) Clean up is done to a "fit for purpose" level - i.e. for public use the level of remaining contamination would be less than if it were an industrial site where personnel wore protective clothing. 3) The "fit for purpose" level is based upon a risk assessment of the site, which uses the Significant Pollutant Linkage" theory. 4) It places the emphasis on a company to take a proactive role in keeping land from contamination.
The "Significant Pollutant Linkages" model in many cases requires a water pathway linkage, thus a good model of "the water cycle" (See figure 1)
is needed to understand the possible effect of contaminating soil.
Surface water passes through unsaturated zone topsoil to the aquifer - groundwater. This water cannot penetrate the zone of low permeability (i.e. clay or chalk), thus the groundwater goes into the stream. If it could penetrate the low permeability zone it would reach the lower aquifer. Below the lower aquifer is bedrock.
Hypothetically if contamination was allowed to flow through the system, it would (in large enough quantity) contaminate the groundwater and the stream. The significance of this is, on average one third of the UK's drinking water comes from ground water. By contaminating the groundwater you are potentially contaminating the drinking water.
This is specifically important to our company since many of our sites (refineries and tank farms) lie near to estuaries, rivers and canals. If any chemical contaminated the soil at our sites, it could be transported by groundwater to either a) a drinking water treatment plant or b) an estuary, river or canal where it would damage the ecosystem there and also possibly get transferred into the drinking water.
The risk assessment procedure applied to our sites would enable a full evaluation of what, if any remediation of the three types of site need - to make them "fit for purpose" - in accordance to guidance from the UK Environment Agency. Since most sites are over fifty years old and run down due to under investment, a broad spectrum of results would be expected.
The risk assessment would take the following outline:
This report will now examine the possible outcomes of a risk assessment of our sites, (considering all three varieties with stated assumptions). It will focus on two contaminants chemicals; benzene and lead (see Appendix A for complete Chemical Hazard Assessments). Both of which (or were) component parts of petrol. Benzene is "Highly toxic and carcinogenic, if mobile in water poses great risk to public health" and lead is "Quite toxic - if repeatedly exposed. Not very mobile, but if found in groundwater could prove to be hazardous".
The theoretical risk assessment will look for significant pollution linkages considering stage 1 and 4 of the risk assessment, and then summarise the remedial possibilities of any proposed possible risks. The full theoretical assessment can be seen in Table 1.
The Love Canal incident and subsequent legislation has meant industry has had to adopt a pro-active approach to maintaining and remediation of any of its contaminated sites. The deterrent to this is the "polluter pays principle", in which industry and individuals are held to account for their contamination, thus encouraging a pro-active role.
Contaminated land is not considered contaminated unless a significant pollutant linkage is found. If diagnosed such, it is administrated by the Local Authority or the Environment Agency (only for special sites) who would serve remediation notices stating the remediation required for the site and a timescale.
As a consequence, Spectrum Petrochemicals must check to see if our sites are contaminated and have significant pollutant linkages. The fact that most of our sites are over fifty years old, run down, and previous uses were probably industrial would also imply that contaminated land could be an issue for Spectrum Petrochemicals.
I suggest the following action:
A preliminary and historical assessment of each site, this would eliminate immediately (with relatively low cost), which sites were contaminated and which were not. (See Stage I)
A full site investigation should take place on all sites that from preliminary investigation were seen to pose possible contamination threats. (see Stage II, III and IV)
If many sites were found to be contaminated from the full site investigations, then by prioritisation, the worst contaminated sites must be remedied first.
The remedial costs per site are estimated as the following:
Ongoing pollution could be stopped by modernising facilities and using less potentially contaminating processes. This would require capital investment, but would give long term financial benefit (less remediation costs in the future).