In 1999 Professor Ahmed H. Zewail was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry for "his studies of the transition states of chemical reactions using femtosecond spectroscopy."() This meant that structural features of the transition state (denoted ) could be eluded. Before this breakthrough only kinetic and thermodynamic information was known about the transition state.
A transition state has a lifetime of less than  100 femtoseconds (1 fs = 1x10 -15 s)(). The transition state lies at an energy maxima of a reaction (see figure 1.1). The bond breaking and forming occurs in the transition state, on a time scale of 10-100 fs, which before the advent of femtosecond lasers was unobservable.
It is only the development of the laser since it was first developed from the maser in 1960 that this has been made possible. The first laser was the ruby crystal solid state laser, followed shortly in 1961 by the invention of the gas Helium-Neon laser. Since their conception they have been used and revolutionised Science especially some areas of spectroscopy to the extent they are now essential.
Spectroscopy is the branch of science devoted to discovering the chemical compositions of materials by looking at the light they emit. The origins of spectroscopy lie in quantum mechanics, and the implications it has for the energy levels in molecules. The Schrdinger Equation is the fundamental equation to quantum mechanics and dictates that energy levels of a system (an atom or molecule), are quantised, and can only take discrete values.
From Young's Double-Slit experiments it was shown that light possesses both wave and particle properties, this was further defined by Planck, when he theorised light was composed of photons possessing energy E;
(Equation 1.1)
where h is Planck's constant = 6.626 x 10 -23 Js and  is the frequency of light in s -1 or Hz.
Absorption spectra show only a few discrete wavelengths of light are absorbed (or emitted) by atoms and molecules. This is since the incident photons interact with the atoms or molecules; exciting the system from one energy level to another. The energy of the photon absorbed is the energy difference between the two levels:
(Equation 1.2)
where E 2 is the excited energy level, E 1 is the ground energy level and E is the energy difference between the two level. Hence only certain frequencies of light can be absorbed or emitted by atoms or molecules.
Part of the Born-Oppenheimer approximation allows these discretely spaced energy levels to be separated into three components; electronic, vibrational and rotational, (see figure 1.2 from ()). In electronic energy levels, electrons can be excited from one energy level to another, or relax from one energy level to another and emit a photon of the corresponding energy. However in vibrational and rotational energy levels the mode or frequency of vibration or rotation can increase or decrease by the absorption or emission of energy matching the difference between the respective energy levels.
The development of the laser has allowed the probing and discovery of the fine line structure of these energy levels, especially the vibrational and rotational levels, and their respective transitions governed by selection rules.
The remainder of this essay will look at the basic principles of lasers, their uses in creating high resolution Absorption Spectroscopy and the Raman Effect and how lasers have allowed us to use it for Spectroscopic purposes.
The word laser is an acronym for: Light Amplification by the Stimulated Emission of Radiation.
Lasers create intense, coherent (one wavelength of light), highly directional light sources of high intensity. In most cases however a narrow distribution of frequencies is produced (shown in figure 2.1 from()). Lasers can also create very short rapid pulses, used in femtosecond time resolved spectroscopy. All of these properties make them unique in comparison to normal polychromatic incoherent light sources.
The fundamental principle of a laser is the propagation of photons of the same wavelength by stimulated emission. Before considering stimulated emission, spontaneous emission must be considered: for example in a two level system, the ground state energy level E 1 and excited state E 2 are separated by E 2 - E 1. A photon with energy = E 2 - E 1 can be absorbed exciting the system from E 1 to E 2. (See figure 2.2). Excited states have very short lifetimes (10 -7 s - 10 -11 s)(5). This is due to the instability of being in an excited configuration, and the system will spontaneously relax to the ground state: emitting a photon with Energy = E 2-E 1, this is called Spontaneous Emission. (See figure 2.3).
Stimulated emission is only different from spontaneous because instead of the excited system relaxing at a random moment in time, the system is stimulated to relax by another photon of energy equal to the difference in energy between the excited state and ground state. The emitted photon will have the same frequency as the original photon and the probability of emission in one atom or molecule is made greater if other photons of similar or the same energies are already present.(5)
To generate a high intensity of coherent light, many photons of the same frequency are required, thus the effect just discussed must be amplified. This is achieved by creating a population inversion, whereby there are more atoms or molecules in an excited state than a ground state. The populations of these two levels are governed by the Boltzmann Equation:
(Equation 2.1)
where N 2/N 1 is the ratio of the populations of the excited state (N 2) compared to the ground state (N 1), g 2/g 1 is the ratio of the degeneracies of the excited state (g 2) compared to the ground state (g 1), E 2-E 1 is the energy difference between the excited and ground states, here E 2 > E 1, k is the Boltzmann constant = 1.308 x 10 -16 J K -1 and T is the temperature in degrees Kelvin.
On inspection of equation 2.1, it is evident, since E 2 > E 1, (ignoring g 2/g 1), that N 2/N 1 will be less than 1, thus the system requires energy supplying to it in the form of pumped radiation. In the first laser a Xenon flash lamp was used to do this.
Another requirement to create stimulated emission is that the excited state must be an extended metastable state. This means the excited state must have a longer lifetime than normal; this is to allow time for stimulated emission to occur. When all the atoms or molecules are in excited states, one atom with spontaneously relax, stimulating another atom or molecule to relax, and a "chain reaction" occurs, creating many photons of the same wavelength.
The basic schematic of the laser (figure 2.4 adapted from (5)), shows how the laser medium is contained within a cavity, with one totally reflective mirror, and a partially reflective mirror (only allowing light to pass through when a threshold intensity has been reached). The mirrors only allow the build up of stimulated emission parallel to the length of the cavity, so the photons all have the same alignment and coherence.
Lasers have very special properties compared to conventional light sources. They create monochromatic, coherent light of a high intensity. These properties are the result of stimulated emission, the fundamentals of which lie in quantum mechanics.
The laser has allowed the probing of electronic, vibrational and rotational energy levels through absorption (and emission) spectroscopy to a greater level of resolution than previously available.
With the development of the laser came a new field of spectroscopy: Raman spectroscopy. The Raman effect occurs in only 1 in 10 7 molecules, thus a light source of high intensity is required to see this effect, the laser being ideal for this.
It is evident that the invention and development of the laser has revolutionised spectroscopy, Chemistry and Science as a whole. This can be seen by the sheer number of Nobel Prizes that have been awarded either for development of lasers, or by using them in a new and revolutionary ways.
There are many more applications of lasers than discussed here, for example; laser isotope separation, laser surgery, optical disc drives, and the monitoring atmospheric chemistry to name but a few.
This essay is presented in edited form at: .ac.uk/fac/sci/chemistry/ug/projectwork//page5/.
Alongside the references cited, the following were also useful as sources of information:
classes/chem4538/raman.htm and (), ().