Crystal violet undergoes readily hydrolysis to its carbinol form. The order of reaction with respect to crystal violet and sodium hydroxide have been found to be both one. The rate constant for the reaction has been measured at different temperatures and the activation energy calculated. The effect of adding inert salts KNO
Crystal violet (CV) Crystal violet in aqueous solution is violet, but the carbinol derivative is colourless, thus making the rate of reaction ideal for study in UV-Visible spectrometry.
Many studies have already been conducted on this reaction, finding the order with respect to CV and hydroxide ion alongside more complicated factors affecting kinetics such as: varying the inert salt present in solution and varying the solvent the experiment is conducted in.
The aim of this brief study was to determine the order of reaction with respect to CV, NaOH, look at the effect of adding inert salts CaCl
The underlying premise of the kinetic studies is Beer-Lambert Law:
Where
By using a UV-Visible spectrometer to measure the absorbance vs time, concentrations can be calculated at time t, and thus the rate of reaction calculated.
The results of the experiments have shown many important factors that affect the kinetics of the hydrolysis of crystal violet. Such as the order of reaction with respect to OH- and CV are both first, but the effect of adding an inert salt to the solution proved that there is perhaps a secondary pathway of the reaction taking place also- which is also eluded to in [5].
The solvent effects were unexpected; methanol especially exhibiting second order reaction kinetics. Thus a competing nucleophilic attack, rather than a solvent effect- and as such a poor illustrator of the effects of solvent on the reaction kinetics. However the acetone results were good, and in line with literature data- and implying that the acetone stabilises the carbocation more readily than water (increase in rate), but the OH- nucleophile has more difficulty displacing the acetone due to the stronger Van der Waals interaction occurring between CV and acetone and this is seen in a larger activation energy (compared to water solvent).
The accuracy obtained here when compared (to the few experimental results available), shows that for a limited undergraduate set up the results are quite good. Ideally the reaction would be carried out in an inert nitrogen atmosphere, and all solvents properly degassed before used as well as crystal violet solid being prepared from scratch and re-crystallised before being made into a solution to increase purity of reagents. Alongside all experiments being repeated- to decrease the errors, however this would require more time than the three days provided.
For the ionic salt effect, more results would need to be obtained to be more conclusive about another reaction pathway; especially at very low ionic strength. Some of the higher ionic strength experiments conducted here were probably out of the Debye-H Also a larger range of salts could also be used to look at the effect.
For the solvents, a wider range of solvents could be used to investigate solvent effects, however caution has to be applied when choosing a solvent; since methanol was a competing nucleophile to hydroxide and change the whole kinetics of the situation.
I would like to acknowledge and thank my laboratory partner Richard Johnson for the joint experimental results we obtained; Robert Davies and Louise Sims for sharing their data on acetone: water solvent mixtures and KNO Also the demonstrators present in the laboratory for on hand assistance.