The company has been in a steady period of decline since period 4 and it's share price has slipped to 4 th in the industry.
A modification to the Vodite brand VUCK is currently in development and will be available for re-launch in period 9
The brands SULI and SUCK are well established in their target segments and SULI is still particularly profitable and is currently 'propping-up' the company.
The Vodite market represents the biggest opportunity for the company to grow as it is exhibiting excellent growth potential.
The purpose of this report is to detail the current situation and past performance of Team U within the Agora industry. Decisions made and strategic recommendations are under-pinned by a variety of conceptual frameworks.
In addition to this, it will analyse the development of the company's product portfolio up to period 7 as well as proposing recommendations for the coming periods.
After seeing an early increase in share price, Team U ultimately leveled out before a slight drop in value in the final periods.
At the end of period 7 the company's Share Price Index stands at 1159. Within the 'Agora' industry the company is placed fourth in terms of share price and has the lowest market share in both the Sonite and Vodite markets with 14.1% and 11% respectively. Appendix one and two shows Team U against the other firms in the industry in terms of market share. In the Sonite market there is no dominant firm, but E currently leads the market with over 25% market share. The Vodite market is quite different in that Firm E's product is completely dominant with nearly 80% of the market.
With growth in the predicted to be 30.7% in the Sonite market and 194.5% in the Vodite market over the next 5 periods it is clear that a sustainable brand is needed particularly in the latter market.
The company's performance and therefore Stock price index is based on a number of key performance indicators (KPI's). These include Market Share, Retail Sales, Net contribution and ratios such as Current Return on investment. In order for the firm to re-assert its position in the market, it must focus on maximizing all these KPI's as opposed to simply increasing profits.
A number of conceptual frameworks have been developed in order help firms develop strategy for growth including SWOT analysis, Ansoff's Matrix and Borden's Four P's, all of which will be utilized in this recommendation.
All of the performance indicators must be considered together. In the latter periods the firm kept expenditure below total budget in order to improve ROCE but this was achieved at a price, with retail sales and market shares both falling. This ultimately led to a fall in stock price.
At the launch of a product advertising has to be as prevalent as the budget will allow. In addition to this, production levels should be high to accommodate the initial demand for the product. This mistake was made in the launch of both SUCK and VUCK but was particularly a detrimental in the launch of VUCK into the Vodite market where it was the only brand available for the initial period. Given inventory holding costs are only 8% it is therefore sensible to over produce in the initial period and then adjust production levels when more is known about demand.
Using the tools available it is better to base products on predicted future ideal characteristics so the brand will be attractive once its position in the market is better cemented. Since it takes a number of periods from research into a product to its launch, it is better to target customers' future satisfaction as we have done with PVUUU.
It is not always better to be the first brand to a new market. Whilst short term gains are possible, in the long run, the experience gained by competitors from the initial entrants will often enable them to establish a dominant position as the market grows. Profits generated from the introduction of VUCK were good after its launch, but since VEBA entered the market, retail sales have failed to grow in line with the growth of the industry and a sustained market share has been unattainable.
Make sure that the cost of R &amp; D can be comfortably recouped by performing break-even analysis. It cost 7,630,000 to bring VUCK to the market and it has yet to recoup its costs. It is also going to cost an additional 2,990,000 to make the modifications currently in development as the project PVUUU because there is more information about the market. Given the growth of the market it is expected to recoup its costs in only a few periods.
Use the tools available. Given forecasts for market growth and the market research into current and projected market shares it is possible to predict demand quantities and as such suitable production levels. It is therefore un-necessary to over/under produce in any period apart from in the period of introduction. This is especially true given the 20,000 units under or over produced at the discretion of the production staff.
Know the market. The analysis tools are useful in terms of finding out what competitors are doing, but the market research studies are the best indications of what customers want, where they go to get it, and how much they will pay for it. This is the perhaps the best tool for determining advertising expenditure, sales-force numbers and effort allocations and distribution channels.