I think it is a rash decision on the part of the company to ignore the internet as a means of selling policies. It will widen the target market and help to streamline the service offered. Internet firms already in the market place are able to offer a 10% discount on their regular price for customers who use the internet. They can do this and still maintain a healthy profit margin through the savings made on labour. CFS may pride itself on its personal service but the fact is that more and more customers prefer to pay less at the expense of personal contact. From the case, it seems that CFS made the mistake of not being earlier adopters of telephone insurance and were eventually forced to change their plans. It appears they are making the same mistake again.
A 'Failure Mode and Effects Approach' was used to identify the causes of failure (primarily from prior experience), the probability of occurrence and finally the consequences of these failures. The problem with this approach is that not all project teams will have the necessary experience to correctly identify failures and therefore strategies for their avoidance may be mismanaged. It also relies quite heavily on judgement which is a dangerous way to operate. As highlighted in the example of the technology risk, it is not always possible to follow the risk management matrix which suggests 'avoid' the risk in a number of situations. In many cases the project changes are necessary for the survival of the firm and as such some risks will be unavoidable. The matrix is a useful tool for developing strategy but I believe there is more scope for allowing the risk and developing contingency strategies than the matrix suggests.
I have studied the Critical Path Method of predicting project timescales and tracking progress through A-Level mathematics and Quantitative Methods of Analysis. Whilst it is a useful tool in many situations I felt its application here isn't entirely sufficient here given the complexity of the project and the mere estimates of time scales. Estimates carry with them an inherent uncertainty and whilst it does provide a logical progression it fails to take into account variations and possible inefficiencies in resources and labour. I think its application is more useful when combined with another method of project planning such as the Gantt chart which gives a better visual representation.
The types of process looked at in Project Management are similar in structure to those I have observed in many other modules throughout my course. The assessment of risks is a necessary part of the design of any product or service and identification of failures is an essential skill in the understanding of service operations management and supply chain management. The organisation of a given project from concept generation to implementation and evaluation is also extremely similar to that of the design of a new product and its subsequent marketing campaign. Project management requires a combination of both analytical skill and judgement. The birth of the product is similar to the identification by a company of the need to make changes and the quantitative and qualitative nature of evaluation is very similar to that observed in the market place.