Suddenly over night developed severe pain in his knees in feet, which was so bad he couldn't out pressure on his feet. GP was called out who prescribed him painkillers, he said he couldn't do anything else without blood tests. Patient went to the Stayed on the floor of the living room the next night as couldn't get up the stairs. Came into A&E via ambulance as an emergency to the Drs in A&E admitted him.
Hands - clear (small scar on thenar eminence right hand) No clubbing. Hands no signs of RA or OA, normal full movement without pain
Ankles:
Knees:
Feel:
Move:
Heart - S1 and S2 heard, no added sounds
Chest - lungs clear
Abdomen - bowel sounds heard and non tender on light and deep palpation
From notes:
Kidney problems CRF?
MCV = 90
Ca2+ = normal
Xray results - right knee shows osteophytes ++, OA. Knee xr NAD
Arthroscopy showed grade IV OA on right knee, patient having total knee replacement in august
Both knees aspirated the aspirate contained calcium pyrophosphate crystals
Diagnosis = polyarticular crystal arthropathy or polyarticualr septic joints, the latter is less likely.
Why anaemia? Why lymphocytes going down?
B12, folate and ferritin all normal
Urate = 640
Diagnosis is pseudo gout
This usually asymptomatic condition of the elderly is due to deposition of calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) crystals in large joints, most commonly the knee.
The crystals are initially deposited in the cartilage - chondrocalcinosis - where they are associated with degenerative changes. The shedding of the crystals into the joint space results in an acute synovitis and a clinical picture that is similar to that seen in gout.
This condition is more common in men (ratio of 1.5:1).
gout - occurs generally in patients over 40 years old; affects small joints, especially the great toe; clinical features include severe joint pain and swelling, hyperuricaemia; radiological features include soft-tissue swelling; there is uric acid crystal deposition in affected joints; treatment measures include rest and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs e.g. diclofenac, in chronic gout allopurinol prophylaxis
pseudogout - usually affects the elderly; large joints generally involved (especially the knee joint); clinical features include moderate joint pain and swelling; radiology reveals calcification of articular cartilage menisci; calcium pyrophosphate crystals are deposited in affected joints; possible treatment measures include rest, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and joint aspiration
radiology - reveals linear opacification of articular cartilage
examination of synovial fluid - shows positively birefringent crystals
arthroscopy - 'microtophi' on the synovial membrane
tests to investigate associated conditions
Treatment consists of the well tried combination of rest and NSAID's. Intra-articular injection of corticosteroids or joint aspiration may be used in more severe cases.