Mr  came to hospital with his wife on a Saturday morning due to a discomfort in his chest, which he had been experiencing for a week prior to presentation. This sensation had kept him awake the preceding Friday night and spread to a feeling of pain/heaviness in his left arm. He rang the out-of-hours GP service who advised him to go to hospital for further tests, where he was admitted on .
NSTEMI - the intensity of the pain described by the patient would more likely point towards this diagnosis. However, the patient is a diabetic with evidence of microvascular diabetic neuropathy, which could indicate that the chest pain was not so extreme because of his reduced pain receptor sensitivity.
STEMI - the length of the pain on the preceding Friday could point towards this diagnosis as the pain was persistent and was not relieved with GTN.
Musculoskeletal - this is a possible diagnosis as the pain was described as 2 - 3/10 in intensity and co-codamol helped to relieve the pain while GTN spray did not. However, the pain was not elicited with movement, which would make this diagnosis slightly less likely.
Dypepsia - this is also a possible diagnosis as the pain was fairly low in intensity and was made worse on lying down. The positive negatives of the pain radiating to the left arm and no sensations of acid regurgitation would make this diagnosis less likely.
It is unlikely to be respiratory in nature as the pain was not made worse on respiration, he was not breathless, the patient did have a cough but it was not productive and the patient did not feel like he had a fever, making this diagnosis unlikely.
A slightly overweight gentleman who was sitting comfortably in the chair
No clubbing, peripheral cyanosis, tremour, splinter haemorrhages or xanthomata on his hands. There were bilateral dupuytren's contracture and his right wrist was bandaged due to post-angiogram access to radial artery.
Pulse = 96 bpm, regular and weak in character, BP 112/73, RR = 18, O 2 sats = 99% on air, apyrexial
No evidence of jaundice, anaemia, corneal arcus or xanthelasma in his eyes. No central cyanosis, oedema or lymphadenopathy
JVP was not raised
His chest, on examination, was symmetrical with no evidence of scars or asymmetry.
The history and examination cannot rule out an NSTEMI or STEMI. However, the patient was non-tender on palpation and there was no evidence of consolidation on auscultation of the lungs, which makes a musculoskeletal or respiratory cause very unlikely. Dyspepsia cannot be ruled out at this stage, even though the patient was non-tender in the epigastric area. This diagnosis will need to be looked at further if the ECG shows no abnormalities at rest or on exertion.
Mr 's symptoms although minor showed that he had in fact had a severe ischaemic event, which to his pain perception was not severe in nature. Mr  will need to be educated as to how his diabetes might have effected his pain receptors and if he should feel a similar persistent chest pain to present at the hospital quickly for assessment. His diabetes is showing levels of systemic complications with peripheral neuropathy, this will effect him socially as his walking and mobility will be compromised by reduced sensation. Mr  appeared psychologically well balanced, he had a good understanding of his diabetes and subsequent chest pain. However, any person who experiences a life threatening event such as an NSTEMI/STEMI will have psychological repercussions, as it is a reminder of ones own mortality.
Mr was transferred back to  hospital later the same day as his angiogram. The post-procedural complication was a right femoral artery haematoma. There were no other complications.
Different ways chest pain can present to A&amp;E, different differentials for chest pain. To remember that an NSYTEMI/STEMI does not always present typically i.e. intense central crushing chest pain, impending doom, sweating, nausea. In atypical presentations to remember to include Troponin T in the routine blood tests. Acute coronary syndromes - what are they, how are they classified.