Mr , with a 30-year history of CLL (Stage C), had had a three-day history of insomnia with associated low mood, shortness of breath and swollen legs. He went to the haematology department who advised him to go to A&E where he was subsequently admitted on .
Heart failure (RHF or CHF), due to the evidence of dyspnoea, orthopnea and peripheral oedema
Dyspnoea and general lethargy secondary to anaemia due to his CLL
Malnutrition - Mr  has stated that his nutrition is a problem, due to a reduced appetite and receives advice from the dietician. He states he does eat the drinks he is prescribed, which should combat any protein deficits in his body, making this diagnosis less likely.
Liver failure due to heptao-splenomegaly
Nephrotic syndrome/renal failure
Insomnia due to depression coupled with the orthopnea and dyspnoea
Hypothyroidism can cause constipation, intolerance of heat and insomnia - evidence of a goitre and thyroid disease need to be assessed on examination.
Mr  was a cachexic man sitting comfortably in the chair. His ribs were clearly visible
His hands were warm and dry. There was palmar erythema bilaterally and a resting tremour. No evidence of clubbing, peripheral cyanosis, splinter haemorrhages, xanthomata or dupuytren's contracture on his hands.
There was extensive bruising on his hands and forearms.
Pulse = 115 bpm and irregularly irregular, BP 102/52, temp 37.4 OC, RR = 20, O 2 sats 96% on air
Conjunctiva was pale, there was no evidence of jaundice, corneal arcus or xanthelasma in his eyes. No central cyanosis, lymphadenopathy or goitre.
JVP raised above 4cm at 45 degrees
Bilateral pitting oedema up to knees
Mr 's chest, on examination, was symmetrical with significant muscle wasting, revealing his ribs and sternum.
The evidence from the history and examination would indicate that the most likely cause of Mr 's current problems would be:
Heart failure (RHF or CHF), this is a likely diagnosis due to dyspnoea, orthopnea and peripheral oedema; as well as, the evidence of a systolic murmur on auscultation, which would add additional strain on the heart; and bilateral basal lung crackles, indicating pulmonary oedema.
Anaemia could be an additional complication, exacerbating the heart failure and subsequent dyspnoea, as there was evidence of pallor in the conjunctiva.
Liver failure cannot be ruled out due to marked hepatomegaly and ascites.
It is less likely to be renal failure; although there was ascites, there was no loin tenderness or palpable kidneys. Again, this diagnosis cannot be ruled out and blood test will help to understand current renal function.
In the history, Mr  stated that he had been feeling depressed which can exacerbate current physical problems.
Apart from a resting tremor, there was no evidence of thyroid disease on examination, blood results will give the definitive diagnosis.
Mr  has a number of health problems, which need to be managed in a co-ordinated fashion to ensure that he receives the best possible care. He appears to understand his CLL very well and the treatment he has for this and why he has it. His main complaint for this admission is his insomnia and rapid degeneration of his breathing. Psychologically he states that he is low in mood, this will need to be addressed, as any feelings of depression will exacerbate his physical condition, which is already a delicate one.
Mr  was discharged on the , with follow-up as recorded in the final line of results/investigations box above.
There is good evidence-based research for the treatment of heart failure with angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs), -blockers and digoxin [1].
Mr  is a very complicated patient with many different health problems. Due to space limitation, I will focus on heart failure and CLL.
CCF (presentations, management and evidence-based trials for treatment of heart failure); echocardiograms (what are they used for, what is measured and why, how are they done); CLL (what is it, how is it managed).