Mr  was down from the  visiting his sister in law on  who was an inpatient at the . He ran to keep the lift open for his wife and sister in law and the next thing he knew he was lying on the hospital foyer floor. He was assessed in A&amp;E and admitted the same afternoon to CCU.
Likely diagnoses include:
Cardiogenic syncope - due to a tachy or brady arrhythmia. It is more likely to be a brady arrhythmia as Mr  did not have any feelings of palpitations, which is more common in episodes of tachyarrhythmias. The vague awareness throughout the episodes and quick recovery would more likely point towards a cardiac arrhythmia cause.
Vasovagal syncope - this is less likely as the patient did not have any prodrome, which is suggestive of a vasovagal attack.
Neurological causes - such as epilepsy, TIA, CVA are all unlikely as the patient recovered quickly from each episode and there was no residual focal deficits
Vasomotor syncope - due to poor control of the circulation at times of demand (such as running for a lift) is a possibility. However, the patient has not suffered form episode of micturition syncope, which is often a preceding problem, before
Other causes such as poor eyesight, footwear, electrolyte imbalance, sepsis, PE are all very unlikely from the history and can be pretty much ruled out at this point.
A cheerful gentleman sitting comfortably on the bed.
No clubbing, peripheral cyanosis, tremour, splinter haemorrhages or xanthomata on his hands.
No evidence of jaundice, anaemia, corneal arcus or xanthelasma in his eyes. No central cyanosis, oedema or lymphadenopathy
JVP was not raised, there were multiple scars on his abdomen indicating the many operations he has had.
Cardiovascular, respiratory, abdominal and neurological examination were unremarkable
From the history and examination the most likely cause for this presentation is a cardiac cause; therefore, further investigations need to be carried out to look at possible cardiac pathology, such as brady or tachy arrhythmias. Reasons for the arrhythmia could be due to electrolyte imbalance and needs to be checked on blood tests.
The patient feels very fit and well in spite of these two episodes of syncope. He is a very positive man, who feels that he has been 'blessed' after his close shave with death after the discovery of his GI cancer and subsequent remarkable recovery from this. He has a very supportive wife and family, all of which are strong Christians, which adds psychological help, as well as a good social community network. As he mentioned during the interview, his current problem of brady arrhythmia is an easy medical problem to rectify in comparison and coupled with his engineering ability to understand the general principles behind it, he has appeared to have reacted well to this most recent hospital admission.
Mr  was discharged on the , 24 hours post cardioversion and pacemaker insertion.
There is little evidence for cardiac pacemakers for bradyarrhythmias, however, there has been quite a lot of work looking at ICDs for tachyarrhythmias, which will be what this evidence-based section will look at.
Cardiac resynchronisation with specialised left ventricular leads has been shown to reduce symptoms and improve survival in patients with symptomatic heart failure, systolic dysfunction, and widened QRS complexes [2]. The implantable cardioverter defibrillator has become the standard therapy for protecting patients against sudden cardiac death. There have been two recent trials, Multicenter Automatic Defibrillator Trial II (MADIT II) [3] and the Sudden Cardiac Death Heart Failure Trial (SCD-HEFT) [4].
To be continued...
There are three different types of second-degree heart block:
Mobitz Type I or Wenckebach phenomenon. This is when there is progressive PR interval prolongation until a P wave fails to conduct. This process then starts again and is due to block in the AV node
Mobitz Type II occurs when a dropped QRS complex is not preceded by progressive PR interval prolongation. This type of block indicates conduction problems at the infranodal level (His bundle) and carries a greater risk of the heart progressing to complete heart block.
2:1 or 3:1 block occurs when every second or third P wave conducts to the ventricles (always in a fixed ratio). [5]
Permanent pacemakers are implanted in the body subcutaneously in front of the pectoral muscle. They are powered by a solid-state lithium battery, which usually last 5 - 10 years. Pacemakers can be programmed remotely by transmitting electromagnetic signals through the skin to the pacemaker.
There are three letters to the different pacemakers, each letter indicates a different function/location:
First letter (A/V/D) indicates which chamber it is pacing
Second letter (A/V/D) indicates which chamber it is sensing
Third letter (D/I) indicates whether it is inhibitory or not.
Therefore, a DDD is a dual chamber (paces atria and ventricle), dual sensing and reacts in two ways (double) - pacing in the same chamber is inhibited by spontaneous atrial and ventricular signals, and ventricular pacing is triggered by spontaneous atrial events [6].
There are a number of complications, these are:
Infection. If the pacemaker system is infected, antibiotic treatment is ineffective and the pacemaker often needs to be removed to treat the infection before another pacemaker is inserted.
Erosion. The pacemaker can erode through the skin, due to a low-grade infection and/or mechanical factors.
Pocket haematoma. Bleeding into the pacemaker pocket may result in significant pain, swelling and can cause wound breakdown. Warfarin is stopped prior to implantation and INR needs to be less than1.5.
Lead displacement. Often an early complication, a CXR is taken prior to discharge to check the placement of the lead [7].
Brady arrthymias, what to look for on history and examination. What investigations to carry out and why. Different kinds of heart block. Different pace makers and watching the pacemaker being inserted. Reasons for cardioversion, what needs to be done pre-cardioversion, witnessing two being carried out and knowing when on the ECG the heart should be cardioverted.