Right-sided chest pain for the past 6 months, recent increase in pain levels, preventing patient from sleeping. Mr  was having regular reviews with his GP who referred him to A&E after assessment of a CXR taken on  showing a right-sided pleural effusion.
Differential diagnosis will be dictated by whether the effusion is unilateral or bilateral, if it is an exudate or transudate, the latter cannot be ascertained at this point.
Exudative effusions are more commonly unilateral, which would make a diagnosis from the following list more likely:
Carcinoma (primarily bronchial or secondary), this is likely because of the smoking history, the comments from his family that he is losing weight and his age.
Mesothelioma, this is also likely due to his age and past history of exposure to asbestos at work.
Pancreatitis or a sub-phrenic abscess are unlikely as the description of the pain is atypical for both of these presentations. They cannot however, be ruled out until further tests are done.
Autoimmune disease this is less likely as the patient is more likely to feel systemically unwell and to present with multiple systemic problems.
Bacterial pneumonia or TB are an unlikely cause due to the patient not suffering from a temperature or green sputum and the long time-course of the problem (6 months).
Haemothorax is unlikely as there is no history of trauma.
Chylothroax, due to a leaking thoracic duct, this is unlikely as this occurs on the left hand side of the pleura and is caused by trauma or surgery.
Yellow nail syndrome, caused by abnormal lymph drainage leading to yellow nails (onycholysis), pleural effusion and lymphoedema. There is no history of palpable cervical lymph nodes or yellowing of the nails.
Transudative effusions are often bilateral which would make this a less likely diagnosis in this case. Common causes of bilateral effusion include:
Cardiac failure, nephrotic syndrome, hepatic cirrhosis, hypoalbuninaemia (malnutrition, chronic disease, malabsorption)
Unusual causes include:
Pericardial constriction and myxoedema [1,2]
On examination, it is important to take notice of any additional signs that might point towards a less common cause of unilateral pleural effusion. Many of these diagnoses will only be ruled out by blood tests, pleural aspirate tests etc., to narrow down the right diagnosis for Mr .
A slim gentleman who was sitting comfortably in the chair
No clubbing, peripheral cyanosis or asterixis. Nails were normal. He did not have a left index finger due to amputation.
No evidence of jaundice, anaemia, horner's syndrome (unilateral ptosis, miosis and anhydrosis) central cyanosis, oedema or lymphadenopathy.
JVP was not raised.
His chest, on examination (anteriorly and posteriorly), was symmetrical with no evidence of scars, asymmetry, or musculoskeletal abnormality e.g. scoliosis.
As the effusion is unilateral and there was little to no evidence of cardiac failure, nephrotic syndrome or hepatic cirrhosis in the history or examination it is very unlikely to be any of these causes.
This means that the most likely cause is one of the following:
Carcinoma (primarily bronchial / secondary or mesothelioma) is a likely diagnosis and cannot be ruled out until further tests are carried out.
Bacterial pneumonia or TB are unlikely causes due to the patient not suffering from a temperature or green sputum and the long time-course of the problem (6 months)
Pancreatitis or a sub-phrenic abscess are also unlikely, as there were no palpable masses or pain elicited on abdominal examination. In addition, the description of the pain is atypical for both of these presentations. However, they cannot be ruled out until further tests are done.
Autoimmune disease is again less likely as the patient is more likely to feel systemically unwell and to present with multiple systemic problems. There were no abnormalities in other systems, which indicate that this diagnosis is less likely.
Mr  and his wife have had a bad year in regards to their health. Both of them have had a number of problems this year, taking their toll both physically and psychologically. In addition, the worry that the reason for the pleural effusion could be due to cancer is another concern. On a social front Mr  has had an unlucky time since retirement. He and his wife moved to  with his son and granddaughter, however, they fell into problems with their house developers, lost all their money, which forced them to come back to the . This means that they now live in a rented council house, their son and granddaughter can no longer live with them due to monetary as well as physical constraints.
Histology from the VATS on the  is still pending. The pleurodesis until this point had been successful. Mr  was recovering on the HDU ward after a successful operation.
Patients who undergo video assisted thoracic surgery (VATS) rather than thoracotomy tend to experience less pain and shorter hospital stays [3, 4]. Lung biopsies for parenchymal lung disease or excision biopsies at the periphery of the lung can be performed relatively easily; it is believed that it makes inspection and biopsy of the pleura easier. A systematic review of the evidence from randomised trials has not been done assessing the relative advantages compared with open surgery. Therefore, it is not possible to make recommendations for best practice [3].
One paper reviewed 325 VATS chemical pleurodesis performed over 4 years for malignant pleural effusions (MPE). They concluded that VATS chemical pleurodesis for oncological pleural effusion management is a safe and versatile procedure. In addition, they found that the use of talc rather than alcohol significantly increased the therapeutic success rate [4]. A further two papers also believe that VATS should be the method of choice and that talc poudrage is safe and effective in obtaining pleurodesis [5,6].
Another study evaluated the outcomes, safety, and efficacy of an indwelling pleural drainage catheter (PDC) system compared with VATS. 41 consecutive patients with symptomatic MPE between 2000 and 2002 and concluded that the PDC system is an efficacious treatment of patients with MPEs [7].
Pleural effusion, is not a diagnosis in itself and is defined as an abnormal accumulation of fluid in the pleural space. Excess fluid results from the disruption of the equilibrium that exists across the parietal and visceral pleural membranes.
The relative annual incidence of pleural effusion is estimated to be 320/100,000 people in the western world. Congestive heart failure, pneumonia, malignancy, and pulmonary emboli account for most of these pleural effusions. Morbidity and mortality of pleural effusions are directly related to cause, stage of disease at the time of presentation, and biochemical findings in the pleural fluid.
The following mechanisms play a role in the formation of pleural effusion:
Altered permeability of the pleural membranes e.g. inflammatory process, neoplastic disease
Reduction in intravascular oncotic pressure e.g. hypoalbuminemia, hepatic cirrhosis
Increased capillary permeability or vascular disruption e.g. trauma, neoplastic disease, inflammatory process, infection, pulmonary infarction, drug hypersensitivity, pancreatitis
Increased capillary hydrostatic pressure in the systemic and/or pulmonary circulation e.g. congestive heart failure, superior vena caval syndrome
Reduction of pressure in pleural space and/or the lung unable to expand e.g. extensive atelectasis, mesothelioma
Decreased lymphatic drainage or complete blockage, including thoracic duct obstruction or rupture e.g. malignancy, trauma
Increased fluid in peritoneal cavity, with migration across the diaphragm via the lymphatics e.g. hepatic cirrhosis, peritoneal dialysis [8]
Pleural effusions - what can be the cause, what to look for on the history and examination. The clinical signs that can be elicited on examination. Surgical emphysema. VATS and pleurodesis.