Mrs
Mrs
Mrs Once it is occupied, by the flexor tendons and median nerve any swelling of that tunnel results in compression and ischaemia of the nerve causing the above symptoms.
To confirm the diagnosis a clinical examination of the hand will be performed, including the special tests for carpal tunnel syndrome.
Mrs
The examination of Mrs
Three of the four specific carpal tunnel tests were positive, indicating median nerve compression. In addition, she demonstrated numbness across the index finger, which is supplied by the median nerve (sensory), and reduced grip strength bilaterally worse on the right than the left.
The specific carpal tunnel tests are designed to reproduce the symptoms the patient experiences, as all of them compress the carpal tunnel space. Phalen's test involves flexing the wrist for up to 3 minutes, and is positive if symptoms occur. Tinel's test is less reliable than phalens and involves tapping over the flexor retinaculum to aggravate the median nerve and reproduce symptoms. The direct pressure test involves pressing directly over the flexor retinaculum to reproduce symptoms. Mrs
Although Mrs It is therefore necessary to perform an examination of the cervical spine. Mrs
Mrs Her symptoms and examination findings are classical of carpal tunnel syndrome. It is important that she receive treatment for this as it is affecting her job and ability to perform every day tasks. If the carpal tunnel is not decompressed the median nerve can be affected further and muscle atrophy of the hypothenar eminence can occur and later carpal tunnel decompression will not always successfully fully reverse the sensory and motor losses.
Mrs She was very happy with the results and wished to be placed on the surgical day unit list for decompression of her left carpal tunnel in the near future.
Evidence-based studies looking at whether surgical or non-surgical treatments offer the most effective symptom relief.
Carpal tunnel syndrome is the most common compressive neuropathy in the upper limb. Lifetime incidence is 6% in women and 0.6% in men. It is most common between the ages of 40 - 60 years [4].
The carpal tunnel is a narrow fibro-osseous canal, rigidly bound by the carpal bones and roofed by the transverse carpal ligament. It contains the median nerve and the nine extrinsic flexors of the fingers and thumb with their synovial sheath [5].
This case has taught me the symptoms and what to look out for on the history, as well as, how to perform the special tests used for diagnosing carpal tunnel syndrome. I have also learnt how these patients are surgically managed.