A 72 year old man admitted on  for an elective right Charnley total hip replacement, a revision of initial garden hip screw fixation.
As this is revision surgery after failure of the garden hip screw, causing pain and subsequent immobility; and the patient was seen post-op, this section is impossible to complete.
If this patient had arrived at A&E for the first time after falling on his right side causing him to be unable to move his leg or walk the differential diagnosis would include:
Intracapsular and extracapsular neck of femur fractures. If the patient has inflicted an intracapsular fracture there will be concerns over the blood supply to the head of the femur as the blood supply of the head is supplied mainly via the capsule, some by intermedullary vessels and a little from ligamentum teres. This kind of fracture will damage the blood supply to the first two and the ligamentum teres supply is often not sufficient which will cause avascular necrosis. Extracapsular fractures are easier to manage as the blood supply is not interrupted to the head of the femur, the surface area for union is larger and the femoral head is not mobile.
On examination, it would be important to assess whether the leg was shortened and externally rotated which would indicate a NOF fracture. The leg would not appear like this if the injury was an anterior or posterior dislocation, although this type of injury is impossible from a fall and needing a significant force such as a car crash for this to occur [1].
The patient was an elderly, thin, spectacled gentleman who was sitting comfortably in the chair, although every five minutes or so he lifted his bottom up and shifted position.
He had no evidence of jaundice, anaemia, clubbing, cyanosis, or lymphadenopathy. He showed evidence of mild bilateral pitting oedema to his mid calf, probably due to the surgery and relative inactivity post-op.
He was able to walk with a tripod frame and his gait appeared slightly antalgic in nature.
This is once again an impossible section to fill out as the diagnosis is known which is the revision of slipped garden screws to a Charnley THR. His other concerns include returning to as full a pain-free range of movements as possible, to ensure his independence is maintained and enable his return home to his flat.
An elderly gentleman who fractured his neck of femur in  and has had considerable pain and immobility post-fracture and fixation. He lives alone, in a first floor flat, which poses social problems in terms of his independence and ability to self-care. Fracturing your hip from a fall would indicate that there is a likely to be osteoporosis in his hips and perhaps elsewhere that needs to be looked at and treated with bisphophonates etc, to reduce risks of further fractures and disability. His increasing age in itself will also contribute to risk factures of a general anaesthetic, if it is needed in the future. The average lifetime of a THR is about 10 - 15 years, this would mean there is a possibility of needing it revised in the future which could pose further risks.
Transferred to an intermediate/rehabilitation hospital in the move towards discharging him home with little or no social care input needed.
In the UK there are 50,000 hip fractures per year. This fracture most often occurs in women in their 80th or 90th decade. This is usually due to the bone being weakened by an underlying disease - most commonly, osteoporosis but other causes include osteomalacia, diabetes and alcoholism. There is usually a history of trauma although there is a debate as to whether 'patients fall because they fracture or fracture because they fall'.
The risk of hip fracture may be reduced by the use of hip protectors.
Femoral neck fractures as mentioned earlier, that are intracapsular, may disrupt any or all of the blood supply to the femoral head. As well as the damage to the blood supply, the intracapsular nature of the fracture can slow recovery due to either:
A weak callus formation response as intra-articular bone has only a thin periosteum
Blood remains inside the joint capsule, which increases the intracapsular pressure causing further damage to the femoral head and articular cartilage. This is exacerbated further by the synovial fluid, which increases blood clotting time.
On examination, the affected side is shortened and externally rotated. This is because the femoral shaft now moves independently of the hip joint so that ilio-psoas and gravity rotate the femur externally rather than the hip internally.
Fractures of the proximal femur, possible fixation techniques and why they are used. The importance of a multi-disciplinary team approach to elderly hip fractures to ensure near to as full recovery as possible.