The aim of this experiment was to examine the induction of This was done by assaying for enzyme activity by addition of toluene and oNPG to samples of The results show that induction does not occur at 15 Induction occurs fully at 30
The These genes are adjacent to each other in the operon. Before these genes there is a region which regulates the lactose metabolic genes: this region contains the regulator, promoter and operator. The regulator gene encodes a repressor protein which can bind to the operator site This repressor is a tetrameric protein. The promoter contains a binding site for RNA polymerase, and directs the polymerase towards the correct transcription initiation site. In addition to this promoter in the operon, a second promoter is present in front of the regulator gene, which drives the synthesis of the regulator.
The primary carbon source of In the absence of lactose, the transcription of the lac structural genes is blocked by the repressor. The Very little, if any,
When lactose is present it is converted to allolactose, a combination of galactose and glucose with an Allolactose binds in the centre of the large domain in each monomer in the This is done by a conformational change being induced in the interface with the DNA-binding domains. The domains cannot easily contact DNA now, which leads to the DNA-binding affinity being reduced dramatically. The proteins encoded by the structural gene are transcribed, and lactose is utilised.
DNA-binding proteins can stimulate transcription. An example is the catabolite activator protein (CAP), or the cAMP response protein (CRP). When CAP is bound to cAMP, the transcription of lactose and arabinose catabolising genes is stimulated. The CAP-cAMP complex stimulates the initiation of transcription by a factor of 50.
Within the laboratory, induction can be achieved by adding iso-propylthiogalactoside (IPTG), as IPTG is not catabolised by the cell and does not act as a carbon source, so it is described as a 'gratuitous' inducer. This is because, within the laboratory, the cells can be grown in a defined medium with glycerol as the carbon source: the expression of the
The aim of this experiment was:
To examine the induction of
Refer to manual, pg 60-62, and reference section 30 for materials and methods
At 15 No induction occurs at this temperature, so translation and transcription also do not occur. At this temperature a little oNP is released, although there is a slight increase between 40 and 60 minutes (see Figure 1), indicating that the induction of This is due to the decreased enzyme activity as the enzyme and substrate has little kinetic energy. The release of a little oNP must therefore be due to leaky repression of the genes.
At 25 Due to the low temperature, translation and transcription occur at a low rate due to the low temperature, which allows product inhibition to occur very rapidly. The rate of The plateau at this temperature, and also for 30
The results from 30 The increase in the release of oNP (see Figure 1) indicates the translation and transcription are occurring at a high rate, and that The turnover number is high at these temperatures. The plateau, as explained above, is due to product inhibition.
The amount of oNP released at 37 Therefore, fewer enzymes (
The reason for the plateau at different levels of oNP may be due to a ratio between the amount of When the amount of product reaches a certain level in relation to the enzyme, the product inhibits the enzyme and production plateaus. There is a more rapid rate of induction for 37 Therefore, product inhibition occurs more quickly.