To meet growing demand for the Flexi-Connector, there is an opportunity to invest in production capacity. This report analyses three possible investments into expanding the existing product line using the Net Present Value (NPV) method of appraisal.
The NPV technique calculates whether an investment yields a return in excess of other available investments of equal risk.
NPV = sum of discounted net cash flows from the investment - investment outlay.
Santa Clara
The NPVs indicate that Santa Clara makes a good long term investment, that's slightly worse than Waltham. Santa Clara requires $9m more but has a larger capacity and lower fixed costs. Even though the cost of the site has already been covered, I would recommend Waltham as a more attractive prospect.
Ireland
If Compotech are looking for a long term, high risk and potentially high return investment then Ireland is the one to chose because its NPV over ten years is the highest (providing the cost if capital is 10% or less). However, I recommend eliminating this investment on the assumption that shareholders will demand an investment with a faster return and in such a rapidly changing market, it is hard to predict future variables.
Ireland's long term success is highly dependent on demand maintaining its 10% annual growth rate for ten consecutive years. For example, if the demand growth rate falls to 5% per annum after 1998, the NPV will fall to $ 37,702,731  and the plant won't reach its optimal capacity within ten years. This will incur inefficiency costs and make the other investments more attractive. Even under the 10% growth rate, the optimal capacity will not be met for seven years even, which results in wasted capacity so fixed costs are being spread thickly over few units.
Waltham
It is important to consider the other potential uses of Waltham's capacity. If this spare capacity will be wasted or redundant then I would definitely recommend investing in Waltham so as not to forgo this opportunity cost and because the NPVs reflect that this is a low risk investment with good short and long term returns.
Waltham's maximum capacity will also be met within roughly four years, so fixed costs can be quickly spread across many units to reduce total unit cost. However, this does not satisfy long-term demand growth, which forgoes future revenue opportunities. Therefore, if demand continues to grow, invest in the Santa Clara plant 1996 so it will be ready to produce in 1998 (i.e. the year that Waltham meets its maximum capacity). I assume that funds are available for both these investments. See appendix, figure 8.
N.B. The recommends are subject to the results of any further analysis.