The increased competition in the marketplace is a looming danger to CFS's competitive advantage and long-term survival. Therefore, a reorganisation in aim of financial and customer service enhancement has been proposed. The project will have significant, long-term changes to the structure and daily operation of CFS. It necessitates the adoption of a new business model because it requires flexible working rather than the current rigid specialisation of the insurance sectors. Internet links to high street agents will also be utilized and a project team will be adopted to manage the already approved changes. This report discusses the key considerations and gives recommendations for the implementation of the project in question.
It is particularly recommended that the complex and conflicting project stakeholder needs are considered and managed. This is because certain stakeholders who have a high interest and/or influence over the project's activities can affect the implementation, operation and eventual project outcome. Therefore, it is important that the key project stakeholders are identified and classified according to their interest and project influence so those with a high interest and/or influence can be managed suitably. This helps to efficiently prioritise management's time over the stakeholder groups. The analysis starts with the essential internal stakeholders:
Defining the project is key to its success because it makes evaluation much easier and gives a clear focus to all those involved, which prevents employees from working against each other.
It is essential to evaluate the potential project risks in the Appraisal phase because it helps to indicate whether or not the project should be pursued before the strategy is defined.
The following arbitrary scales have been used to classify each risk: To indicate the probability of an uncertainty occurring: improbable (1-3), likely (4-6) &amp; highly likely (7-10). To indicate the impact of the variation on CFS's performance: minor (1-3, i.e. causes problems but no time or financial set backs to any objectives), significant (4-6, i.e. increases costs &amp;/or delays to one or more objectives) and critical (7-10, i.e. causes failure of one or more objectives).
This is conducted before the appraisal in the feasibility phase so the strategic cost, time and quality implications can be reflected in the appraisal. The integrated strategic factors are:
The Project Manager and the project team should exercise all operational planning &amp; control. This involves coordinating those responsible for the work packages and making tactical decisions. I recommend fortnightly review meetings to monitor and control operational progress. This prevents loosing control of the project while it is not too often to waste time.
Standardised progress reports should be given to the Project Manager before each meeting and after every time phase. These should contain the percentage of the work package complete and any revised plans on a Gantt chart. Additionally, the earned value, CPI (see page 8) and time variations plus any concerns should be stated. For further analysis, network analysis can be used for each work package. Reports are beneficial preparation and give structure to meetings. For stakeholder involvement, give the stakeholder group representatives an invite to the review meetings. It is compulsory attendance for the Project Manager, those responsible for the work packages in progress and a financial representative. After the meetings, three levels of reporting should occur as explained below:
It is important that project expectations are an accepted, shared common vision to the key stakeholders. Progress reports will help manage perceptions and do not over-promise.
I have recommended a relatively slow pace of change over nine months, a pilot phase, no outsourcing and a high level of: reporting, control, contingency funds, employee support and stakeholder involvement. These key decisions greatly depend on the current financial status of CFS, which may prevent many of these recommendations from being implemented. If this is the case, then removing the pilot phase will save time and costs but largely increase the project specific risk 1. The level of stakeholder involvement, reporting and contingency funds can also all be reduced by an amount that does not make the project too vulnerable to implement. It is worth spending time to control the costs directly associated with the project so if necessary, the project can be delayed or cancelled if the CPI spirals out of control.
Planning coordinates and builds commitment, but only if all those responsible for the work packages are involved in the process. I used a Gantt chart to visually display the project activities, the basic links between them and when they should start and finish.
The disadvantage of using Gantt charts is the fact that no cost information is displayed. That is why it is important to calculated measures such as CPI. What's more, Gantt charts aid resource planning but do not optimise resource allocation over the project. For example, the insurance section training and the customer service training both occur over months eight and nine by the same training section. What the Gantt chart does not tell you is whether the training section resources can be shifted from insurance training to the customer service training or vice versa. Obviously this would slow down the insurance and speed up the customer service training, but would this extend the project's overall length?
This depends on how much float time the insurance training work package has. If it has a lot, then some of its resources can be shifted to the customer service work package. Use network analysis to calculate the float time. However, if the insurance training work package has no float time (i.e. it is a critical activity) then the training section will not have enough resources to implement both activities simultaneously (assuming they have a constant level of resources). In this case, carry out the customer service training in months ten and eleven, which will delay the project by two months or expedite, as explained below.
To help analyse the risk of the project going over time, predict the longest, shortest and most probable project durations along with their probabilities. If it is probable that the project will be too long, we can control the project's length by expediting before or during the project. Before the project, the assumptions that I have made about the resources available, the work packages, their durations, the integrations between work packages and the project length can be revised to ensure that they are accurate. If my assumptions are erroneous and result in an overestimation of the project length, then expedite by updating the assumptions to reduce the project length. If my assumptions are correct then expediting will incur costs because more resources (e.g. part time training staff or outsourcing) will have to be incurred. Only do this if the cost of reducing the project's duration is less than the cost of letting the project be too long, for example, this may occur if a new competitor enters the marketplace.