Using an audio oscillator and pickup to induce oscillations, the standing waves produced in a fixed length of two different wires were investigated. The velocity of the waves on a thin wire was found to be  from harmonic frequency measurements, which compares favourably to a value of  calculated from a graph of frequency against harmonic number. Measurements of the fundamental frequency for increasing lengths of a thin wire described a proportional relationship between the fundamental frequency and the reciprocal of length, as predicted by theory.
Measurements of the fundamental frequency for increasing applied tensions were made for both wires, and the velocity of the standing waves found to be proportional to the square root of the tension. The masses per unit length were found to be 2.61  0.08 x 10 -4 kg m -1 for the thin wire and 7.83  0.10 x 10 -4 kg m -1 for the thick wire, in agreement with the respective values of 2.48  0.12 x 10 -4 kg m -1 and 7.60  0.22 kg m -1 calculated from diameter measurements and a value for the density of steel of 7.9 g cm -3 [2].
Measurement of the harmonic frequencies of a thick wire showed a deviation from the simple relationship predicted by basic theory, indicating that the elastic force was significant. Young's modulus for the thick wire was calculated to be 6.07  1.25 x 10 11 Pa was calculated, in poor agreement with the accepted value for steel of 2.00 x 10 11 Pa [1].
A wave is any form of periodic disturbance of a medium that changes in form as time progresses. The medium itself does not travel on the macroscopic scale, but undergoes small scale vibrations and displacements from the normal position. These waves may be either longitudinal, along the direction of wave propagation, or transverse, at right angles to the direction of wave propagation, and the displacement of any point on the wave from its equilibrium position can be considered to vary simple harmonically with time. In this experiment we are primarily concerned with the common case of transverse waves on a taut string, although the case of longitudinal waves in an elastic rod will also be considered.
Figure 1 shows the basic case of a sinusoidal transverse wave on an infinitely long, taut string, with several common variables indicated. From these variables a general expression for the wave can be derived, of the form
[1]
Or alternatively, in complex notation,
[2]
The longitudinal velocity of the wave is given by
[3]
In this experiment we are also interested in the transverse, or phase, velocity of the wave. This is the velocity of the transverse displacement of each point on the string from its equilibrium position. If the string experiences an applied tension T and has a mass per unit length m, then the transverse velocity of the wave (assuming that the amplitude of the wave is very much less than the wavelength) is given by
[4]
This can be derived from first principles by considering the forces acting on an infinitesimal section of the string, but such a derivation is too long to present here (For details of the derivation, refer to [4] or [5]). The important point is that equation [4] is a consequence of the wave equation
[5]
The form of a wave can be altered through interactions of the medium with boundaries that impose certain conditions upon the form of the wave at that point. An example is the case of a fixed end of string, towards which a wave pulse is travelling. The displacement of the string at the fixed end must always be zero, and hence when a wave pulse arrives at the fixed end it exerts a force on the fixed point. The point then exerts a Newton's third law paired force on the string, producing a reflected wave pulse. Since the paired forces act in opposing directions, this reflected wave pulse is inverted. Alternatively, this situation can be considered in terms of the principle of superposition.
The principle of superposition states that, for two waves y 1 and y 2 present in the same position at the same time, "y1+y2 is a possible solution of the wave equation, with the total displacement equal to the sum of the two displacements due to each of the sources alone". [4] Hence if the total displacement at the fixed end is to be zero, then the reflected wave pulse must be the inverse of the incident wave.
This can be extended to the case of a continuous, travelling, sinusoidal wave with the form given by equation [1]. In this case each point of the wave that is incident on the fixed end is inverted as it reflects, producing a second wave that travels in the opposite direction to the incident wave and has a displacement of equal magnitude but opposite sign at all points. The two waves will superpose to produce a resultant wave as shown in figure 2.
Figure 2 shows that the superposition of the two waves produces a resultant wave that appears to vibrate in place. This superposition is known as a standing wave, and can be described by an equation of the form
[6]
a derivation of which can be found in [4] or [5]. This expression requires the definition of two new variables. , angular frequency of the wave, equals 2f, and k, the wave number, equals . It can be seen from this expression that, since the displacement, x, and time, t, functions are no longer explicitly associated, the wave does not propagate through the medium (along the string in this case) as time progresses.
The points on the standing wave at which the displacement is always zero are referred to as nodes, and are situated at half wavelength intervals. The midpoint between each pair of nodes is referred to as an antinode, and is the point at which the displacement of the standing wave varies periodically between a maximum and a minimum. The energy of the wave is a maximum at the antinodes but zero at the nodes, and so there is no net energy transfer along a standing wave as energy cannot be passed through the nodal positions. Compare this to a travelling wave which is, at one level, merely a method of transferring energy from one place to another.
The concept of standing waves produced by reflection at one boundary can be further extended to the case where both ends of a string are fixed. This gives the string a fixed length, and means that the displacement of the string at both of its ends must always be zero.
Combining equation [1] with the definitions for  and k provides an alternative expression for a sinusoidal travelling wave:
[7]
Or
[8]
Using this exponential form and the principle of superposition, remembering that the amplitude of one travelling wave is the negative amplitude of the other travelling wave, the exponential expression for a standing wave can be shown to be
[9]
Or
[10]
when the boundary condition y=0 at x=0 is considered. However there is another boundary condition imposed on this wave, namely y=0 at L=0. Inserting this condition into the above expression gives
or  [11]
This limits the angular frequency (and hence the frequency, since the two terms are often interchangeable when considering waves) to specific values given by
[12]
where n is the number of the harmonic frequency
These frequencies are known as the normal modes, or harmonic frequencies, of the vibrating string. One consequence of this expression, and of the boundary conditions, is that the string can only support whole numbers of half wavelengths. Hence the value of n is also the number of half wavelengths present on the string at that harmonic frequency. The case n=1 is referred to as the fundamental frequency of the string.
Since there is no energy transfer in a standing wave, the string must be supplied with energy by an external source in order for it to oscillate. This external source can be, for example, plucking of the string, or the use of an audio oscillator attached to a pickup to produce sound waves which cause the string to vibrate when incident upon it. The damping effect of air resistance causes the string to lose energy as time progresses, and so the oscillations of the string will die away with time. In order to maintain the oscillation of the string a continuous input of energy is required, and hence the second method mentioned here is more useful for an extended investigation into the harmonic frequencies of a vibrating string.
The waves produced by the pickup will produce forced oscillations of the same frequency in the string when incident upon it. This driving frequency will not necessarily coincide with one of the natural harmonic frequencies of the string, and if this is the case then the amplitude of the forced vibrations of the string will be very small. As the driving frequency approaches one of the natural harmonic frequencies, the vibrations of the string will begin to increase in amplitude, reaching a maximum when the driving frequency equals one of the natural harmonic frequencies of the string. This effect is known as resonance, and it is this effect that can be used to identify the harmonic frequencies of the wire as the peak in the amplitude of the forced oscillations can be easily detected.
In order for this method to work satisfactorily, both the pickup and the device to measure the amplitude of the forced oscillations must be placed at antinodal positions along the wire. If the pickup is not placed in such a way then the standing wave will not be produced, or will have a smaller amplitude as the energy input would be partly at a nodal position where it cannot be used to produce a wave. Placing the detecting device at an antinodal position means that it receives the most powerful signal from the standing wave, and hence will be able to detect any amplitude changes more easily.
Substituting the definition for  into equation [12] and rearranging leads to the expression
[13]
This can be used as the basis for several investigations into the properties of standing wave harmonics. It can be seen from this expression that if the value of successive harmonic frequencies are measured whilst the length of the string is kept constant, then a graph of f n against n will yield a straight line through the origin with gradient . This allows the velocity of the waves on the wire to be calculated. It can also be seen that if the value of the fundamental frequency  is measured for different wavelengths then a graph of f against  should be a straight line through the origin. In both cases the string must be kept taut, as pure standing waves will only be produced if there is no slack in the string. Therefore the tension applied to the string must be sufficient for this to be the case, but should not be too large as applying too large a tension can cause nonlinear stretching of the wire to take place, which would also affect the form of the standing waves produced.
The theory discussed so far assumes that the waves are being produced on a taut string. However there is no reason that a wire cannot be substituted for the string, as the basic theory remains unchanged. There is however one modification that must be made.
Equation [4] shows the simple relationship between tension, mass and velocity for waves produced on a taut string. When a wire is used instead of string to produce the standing waves, this relationship is only strictly true for completely flexible, ideal wires. Real wires experience another force in addition to the applied tension owing to the fact that they are, in effect, metal rods with a very small diameter. This extra force must be taken into account if an accurate description of the behaviour of the wire is to be produced.
This extra force is known as the elastic force, and is responsible for the production of longitudinal waves in the solid rod or wire. This force is proportional to Young's modulus, E, which is specific to the particular material under investigation, and to the radius of the wire, r, to the fourth power. If this force is included in the description of the wire's behaviour then the equation for the velocity of the waves produced on the wire becomes
[14]
This equation indicates that the velocity of the waves on the wire depends upon the wavelength of the waves, unlike equation [4] which indicates no such dependence. This relationship is therefore a far more complex one than that shown previously. This equation can be combined with equation [13] to eliminate v and , giving
[15]
Considering the form of equation [13] for the fundamental frequency gives . If it is assumed that, for the fundamental frequency, equation [4] is a valid approximation then the square root term in equation [15] can be substituted for this equation for the velocity of the fundamental frequency. The resulting equation can then be rearranged to give
[16]
It can be seen from this expression that if the values of the harmonic frequencies of a thick wire, in which the elastic force is likely to be significant, are found whilst L and T are kept constant, then a graph of  as a function of n 2 should be the straight line  until the elastic force becomes significant, at which the point the graph will become a straight line with gradient . If only these points are plotted then the graph becomes a straight line with gradient  that has a y-axis intercept of 1. A value for E for the particular metal from which the wire is made can then be calculated from the value of the gradient of the graph.
By setting the length of a thin wire to a constant 0.600.000707m and measuring its harmonic frequencies, a value for the speed of the waves on the wire of  was found. This compared favourably to the value of  found through direct calculations utilising the basic relationship between frequency, wavelength and velocity. The initial evaluation of the error in the frequency readings was judged to be correct, but the original evaluation of the error in L was judged to have been an underestimation. The subsequent corrected value for the error in m was still insufficient to account for the discrepancy in the value of v, and so a systematic error owing to the interference caused by background noise was suggested. Systematic errors owing to misplacement of the driver and detector, and due to the magnetic field of the small magnetic strip were considered, but dismissed.
By measuring the fundamental frequency of the thin wire for increasing lengths of wire, it was shown that the fundamental frequency of the wire was proportional to the reciprocal of the length of the wire, as predicted by theory. However the straight line did not pass through the origin, contradicting the predictions of theory, and so a systematic error arising from interference owing to background noise was once again suggested.
By measuring the fundamental frequency of a fixed length of both the thin and thick wires for increasing applied tensions, values for the mass per unit lengths of both wires of 2.610.08x10 -4kgm -1 and 7.830.10x10 -4kgm -1 respectively were found, in excellent agreement with the values of 2.480.12x10 -4kgm -1 and 7.600.22x10 -4kgm -1 calculated from the measurements of the wire diameters and a value for the density of steel of . The initial evaluations of the errors in T and r were judged to be correct, and the re-evaluated error in the value of L was judged to be appropriate for this investigation as well as for the first investigation.
By setting the length of the thick wire to 0.250.000707m and measuring its harmonic frequencies, the point at which the values of the harmonic frequencies began to deviate from the standard linear relationship was found. By plotting a graph of f n against n for these harmonics, a value for Young's modulus of 6.071.25x10 11Pa was found, in poor agreement with the accepted value for steel of 2.00x10 11Pa [1]. The errors in L (as re-evaluated), r and T were judged to have been evaluated correctly, but the appropriateness of the evaluation of the error in f n could not be assessed Possible systematic errors owing to the method used to find the harmonic frequencies, and to interference caused by background noise were suggested.