has suffered from an intermittent speech impairment since  2005, she was referred to the neurosurgeon by Dr  (Consultant neurologist) on
is a right handed lady indicating that her dominant hemisphere (i.e. that which controls language and mathematical function) is on the left. From the history it appears that  is suffering from a type of dysphasia. Dysphasia is an acquired loss of production or comprehension of spoken and/or written language secondary to brain damage. There are two main types of dysphasia - Expressive or Receptive. Expressive dysphasia is characterised by non-fluent speech produced with effort and frustration. Signs to look for on examination include malformed words and impaired reading and writing. Comprehension is intact, patients understand questions and attempt to convey meaningful answers. There may be co existing right arm and facial weakness. It is caused by a lesion in the posterior part of the dominant third frontal gyrus (Brocas area). Receptive dysphasia is characterised by empty, fluent speech. The patient is oblivious of any errors, reading writing and comprehension are impaired. It is caused by a lesion in the posterior part of the first temporal gyrus (Wernickes area). The examination will therefore need to differentiate between the two types of dysphasia. The motor system will also need to be examined for any evidence of coexisting weakness.
Dysphasia may develop as a result of vascular, neoplastic, traumatic, infective or degenerative disease of the cerebrum. The sudden onset of 's initial episode of dysphasia in  2005 would indicate a vascular cause and this is supported by the diagnosis of a left sided CVA. However, the lack of associated weakness indicates that this was not a normal infarct affecting the motor cortex. Vascular lesions also tend to improve with time which does not fit with 's history as her dysphasia has been getting progressively worse. Cardiovascular examination will therefore be important especially blood pressure, arrhythmias and carotid bruits which may all indicate risk factors for stroke. The recurrent episodes of dysphasia could be due to a vascular cause such as transient ischaemic attacks which are temporarily reducing the blood supply to the region of brain controlling language. There has been no history of head trauma to indicate this as a relevant cause of the dysphasia.  is keen to have a diagnosis for her condition as she has had no symptoms apart from those mentioned and says that she feels well in herself.
The episodes have increased in frequency since  and have become progressively worse - this would indicate an expanding brain lesion. A space occupying lesion will lead to raised intracranial pressure depending on the size of the lesion. Signs of raised intracranial pressure include nausea and vomiting, headaches (often worse in the morning) and papilloedema, none of which  reported in her history.  didn't report any weight loss a sign associated with neoplasms. If the lesion is a neoplasm, the speed of onset of symptoms suggest a malignant rather than a benign neoplasm. Intracranial tumours are classified according to their tissue of origin with the most common group of primary brain tumours being gliomas. This group contains astrocytomas, glioblastoma multiforme, oligodendrogliomas and ependymomas. They commonly occur in the frontal, parietal or temporal lobe.
Likely diagnosis at this stage would point to either a neoplasm in  dominant hemisphere. Another possible diagnosis could be recurrent TIA's due to e.g. carotid artery stenosis or valvular dysfunction as  recalled the possibility that she had had rheumatic fever as a child. However from the history,  does not appear to have any risk factors for atherosclerosis.
On examination  was alert and comfortable. 's speech was non fluent and appeared to require a lot of concentration and effort.  mis-pronounced words mid sentence and had to stop and think about the next work she wanted to say.  had difficulty carrying out simple commands such as 'touch your left ear with your left hand and vv' indicating left-right disorientation indicating a possible lesion in the dominant (left) parietal lobe.  had difficulty subtracting 7 from 93 but said that she had always had difficulty with mental arithmetic - possible degree of acalculia. On examination,  was able to clearly write a sentence that was given to her. However, her diary showed evidence of dysgraphia and jumbling of words which had become progressively worse since  (see attached sheets).
Unfortunately we were unable to examine  for tactile agnosia but the patients own description of a previous examination suggests an element of astereognosis especially in the right hand supporting a possible lesion in the left parietal lobe. No evidence of special neglect as  was able to draw a complete house when asked.
On examination of the cranial nerves, no abnormalities were detected. Examination of the upper and lower limbs showed no abnormalities although temperature sensation was not examined and 's history indicates a reduction in temperature sensation in her right hand and forearm.
From the history and examination it appears that  is suffering from expressive dysphasia. This could be due to a space occupying lesion, or recurrent infarcts in the dominant hemisphere (Brocas area). The most likely cause of 's symptoms is a space occupying neoplasm as the symptoms have become progressively worse over a period of 3  months, this makes a vascular cause less likely. If the lesion is a neoplasm, the speed of onset of symptoms suggests a malignant rather than a benign neoplasm. Diagnosis of such a lesion will require CT or MRI imaging of the brain. Location of a primary tumour should also be investigated by e.g. chest x-ray and abdominal ultrasound or CT, to determine whether the lesion is a primary or secondary brain tumour.
is an independent lady who feels fit and well aside from her dysphasia symptoms.  cannot understand why she has no other symptoms and feels that she may be able to train herself to improve her speech.  is keen to have a diagnosis and begin any required treatment as her daughter is currently pregnant and she wants to be around for her.
On , 's expressive dysphasia appeared to be more pronounced. An urgent CT scan was ordered for evidence of a postoperative haematoma and 's neurological status was monitored.
CT Report: The CT scan showed evidence of white matter oedema surrounding the left temporo-parietal lesion. There was no evidence of haematoma.
IV Dexamethasone (8mg) was prescribed to reduce the postoperative oedema and 's neurological status continues to be monitored.  was informed that the symptoms should ease over the next few weeks.
, 's dysphasia appeared to be even more pronounced.  also had slight facial drop on the right side. CT scan showed white matter oedema, midline shift and effacement of the ventricle on the ipsilateral side. There was also evidence of haematoma at the biopsy site which was not present on previous CT scan (). IV Dexamethasone 16 mg was prescribed.
, 's biopsy was reported as being a glioblastoma - WHO grade 4 (highest grading - most aggressive type of glioblastoma). The samples showed malignant glioma composed of highly pleiomorphic astrocytic type cells with scattered mitoses. 's future management is due to be discussed at the MDT meeting on . Once 's current symptoms have been resolved she will be discharge from the neurosurgical ward.  will be referred to a consultant oncologist who will oversee her radiotherapy regime. As the glioma is of such a high grade it is likely that  will receive high dose radiotherapy (20 fractions, 60 Gray) if this can be tolerated over approximately 4 weeks as an outpatient. The aim of the radiotherapy is to reduce the speed of growth of the glioblastoma and delay the speed of onset of symptoms.  will be seen by the neurosurgeon approximately 6 weeks post discharge and will have a rescan approximately 6 weeks after the radiotherapy treatment has finished.
The incidence of brain tumours is 5-15 per 100,000 per year accounting for approximately 2% of deaths. The most common type of primary brain tumour is the glioma (43%) followed by meningiomas (10%) and pituitary adenomas (10%). Brain tumours may benign or histologically malignant but will rarely metastasise outside the brain. Approximately 20% of brain tumours are secondary metastases - most commonly from the lung, breast and kidney [1].
Patients with presumed primary brain tumours have two surgical management options - biopsy or resection.  was not displaying any signs of increased intracranial pressure and so resection of the tumour was not essential. Patients with severe raised intracranial pressure will obviously require debulking of the tumour in order to maintain adequate cerebral perfusion. Patients without signs of raised intracranial pressure or in patients where resection is impossible due to side effects of surgery, biopsy is the only option. In 's situation debulking of the tumour was contraindicated due to the location of the tumour and the risk to 's speech and motor function. Studies into the benefits of surgical resection versus biopsy for malignant gliomas are limited and it has been identified that further large multicentred RCTs are required to conclusively answer the question of whether prior to radiotherapy, resection or biopsy is superior [2].
Treatment with chemotherapy has been disappointing as there is difficulty in finding a drug which will cross the blood brain barrier [1]. The benefit of chemotherapy in patients with glioblastoma is debatable. The Medical Research Council found no significant benefit in overall survival when evaluating the use of adjuvant chemotherapy in patients with glioblastoma [4]. However, recent RCT studies by the EORTC (European organisation for research and treatment of cancer) showed a statistically significant benefit to median survival of treating patients with radiotherapy and Temozolomide compared to radiotherapy alone [4]. This is obviously an area for further research. Current NICE guidance state that Temozolomide is not recommended for first-line chemotherapy treatment for patients with malignant glioma who have failed primary therapy (surgery and/or radiotherapy), except in the context of a randomised controlled trial against a standard-treatment comparator [5]. NICE are currently appraising a different type of treatment - the use of carmustine implants and Temozolomide for the treatment of newly diagnosed high-grade glioma [7]. Future treatment options for patients like  may therefore be increased.
As stated previously,  suffered from a haematoma and worsening of her dysphagia post operatively. Postoperative haematomas at the operative site occur in approx. 5% of patients and a transient neurological deficit occurs in approx. 10% of patients [6].
The care of patients with a brain tumour is multidisciplinary and requires the assistance of a neurosurgeon, an oncologist, a radiologist, an expert in radiation therapy and various members of the nursing team. Management varies depending on tumour location, tissue type, and co morbid conditions. Further neurosurgical treatment may involve the placement of a ventricular shunt if 's tumour produces sufficient mass effect to cause obstructive hydrocephalus. Despite the short duration of symptoms, Gliomas are often surprisingly large at the time of presentation, occupying much of a cerebral lobe. Indeed 's glioma measured approximately 3 cm on the MRI scan. The treatment of gliomas remains difficult as there are currently no curative treatments [3]. This is because by the time the tumour is detected clinically or radiographically, the tumour is beyond the reach of local control [3]. The treatment of patients with malignant gliomas is therefore palliative. The aims of surgery are to establish a pathological diagnosis, relieve mass effect, and if possible, achieve a gross total resection to facilitate adjuvant therapy [3].  is likely to suffer from the side effects of radiotherapy (nausea, hair loss, lethargy) as she is likely to receive a maximum dose due to the grading of her glioblastoma.  will therefore need support and extra care during her treatment regime which can be provided by district and Macmillan nurses.  will require a lot of support and encouragement during her palliative care and radiotherapy.
Focused examination for dysphasia
Use of medication pre and post surgery
Importance of post operative monitoring and imaging
Astereognosis - failure to distinguish objects held in the hand by touch alone - due to a dorsal column lesion originating in the contralateral parietal lobe affecting appreciation of size, shape, texture and weight
Complications of surgery
Management of brain tumours