was admitted to hospital on  for an elective left carotid endarterectomy
Transient Ischaemic Attacks are usually caused by the passage of emboli through the cerebral circulation which interrupts blood flow to the brain. TIA's may also be caused by a fall in cerebral perfusion due to dysrhythmia or decreased flow through stenosed carotid arteries due to atheroma formation. Signs to look for on examination would be an irregular heart beat and a bruit over the carotid arteries. If a carotid bruit is heard it is an unreliable guide to the severity of the stenosis. The main sources of emboli to the brain are thrombi and atheromatous plaques within the carotid or vertebral arteries or in the heart. Cardiac thrombi can occur due to atrial fibrillation which often occurs secondary to valvular heart disease. The patient may therefore have atrial fibrillation or auscultation may reveal signs of a heart murmur.
Transient Ischaemic attacks cause sudden loss of function (i.e. within seconds) and last for approximately 8-14 mins (&gt; 24 hours treated as a stroke). Hemiparesis and dysphasia are the two most common presenting symptoms of TIA's,
others include:
Amaurosis Fugax - a sudden transient loss of vision in on eye due to the passage of emboli through the retinal arteries.
Transient Global Amnesia - episodes of amnesia lasting for several hours (presumed to be caused by posterior circulation ischaemia)
Differential causes for transient episodes could be syncope, postural hypotension (as a side effect of the medication  takes for her hypertension although this is unlikely as the transient episodes would occur more frequently and would not be associated with hemiparesis or dysphagia), migraine, anaemia, focal epilepsy or hypoglycaemic attacks etc.
also has many of the risk factors applicable to carotid artery disease - raised cholesterol, hypertension, previous history of smoking, old age and limited mobility.
From the history we know that the cause of 's TIA's is due to carotid artery stenosis. As previously mentioned,  has many of the risk factors applicable to carotid artery disease and atheromatous plaque formation i.e. hypertension, history of smoking. Observations showed that 's blood pressure was stable at 140/75. 's heart rate was 80 bpm and regular no signs of atrial fibrillation as a possible cause of emboli. There was no evidence of anaemia from the general examination. Auscultation of the heart revealed an aortic stenosis which radiated to the carotid arteries. This is a possible site for cause of emboli, however mitral regurge is more commonly associated with production of emboli.  was on statins indicating that she had a high cholesterol level - a risk factor for carotid artery disease.
Carotid artery stenosis can be exacerbated by co morbid conditions such as chronic lung and cardiac disease. This is because the physiological changes associated with such conditions can also limit oxygenation to the brain and can result in cerebral ischaemia in patients who would otherwise tolerate even high-grade carotid stenosis [1]. 's aortic stenosis may therefore be exacerbating her carotid artery stenosis.
is an independent 84 year old lady who has been admitted for an elective Left Carotid Endartectomy.  is a symptomatic case in the fact that she suffers from recurrent TIA's due to emboli produced from the stenosed carotid.  has expressed a definite desire not to be resuscitated if the need should arise during the operation.  is not concerned about the operation but feels that if she arrests it is her time to go.  understands why the operation is needed and is aware of the possible risks and benefits. Although the emboli produced from the carotid have not yet left  with any permanent physical abnormality (the weakness in her right arm has always recovered after her TIA) she is aware that there is risk of such an event occurring. Socially,  may need extra help during her recovery period as she currently lives alone e.g. Daily home help or intermediate care may be required after discharge from the  to assist  with personal activities of daily living.
has now been discharged from the  and is due to be reviewed by Mr  at his outpatient clinic in  in 4-6 weeks. 's GP has been informed about her postural hypotension and will review  in the first week of discharge. Clips were removed day 8 post op (). The carotid ultrasound on  showed that the right asymptomatic carotid artery had a greater stenosis than the left symptomatic carotid artery. Future issues for consideration point at the need to operate on the right carotid artery.  is an old lady who has suffered with post operative morbidity due to problems with her blood pressure. Surgery on an asymptomatic carotid artery is therefore not advised in 's current physical condition.  herself is also not keen to have further surgery. The stenosis will be monitored through Mr 's clinic and should  suffer with any symptoms from her right carotid artery then it is likely that surgery will be indicated.
Major studies have shown the benefits of carotid endarterectomy as compared to medical therapy in symptomatic patients with a carotid artery stenosis of 70% or greater - with only eight carotid endarterectomies needed to prevent one stroke in symptomatic patients. Carotid endarterectomy has been shown to reduce the risk of disabling stroke or death in patients with stenosis exceeding 70% (ECST) or 50% (NASCET) [1]. However, this result is only applicable to surgically-fit patients operated on by surgeons with low complication rates (less than 6%) (Cochrane).
The optimum time for surgery in these patients is 2 weeks after the patients last symptoms, however, the chance of a patient being admitted for theatre within this time period is minimal. Trans cranial Doppler is used to assess microemboli, a high load of which is associated with early carotid thrombosis and increased risk of stroke. The  hospital cardiovascular unit has pioneered a treatment for recurrent TIA's which involves the administration of trans-cranial directed anti platelet drugs to control the number of micro emboli. This treatment aims to reduce the risk of stroke until the patient can be treated safely on the next surgical elective list [2].
Initially 's operation was performed under local anaesthetic, unfortunately this had to be changed to general anaesthetic as  lost consciousness once the arteries were clamped. Local anesthesia has the advantage of allowing direct evaluation of the patient's neurologic status without sophisticated monitoring. This enables the surgeon to operate on the majority of patients without the need for a shunt which may pose an increased risk of stroke to the patient. General anaesthesia has the advantage of improved airway control and patient comfort during prolonged operations. However, it does require the use of routine or selected shunting, and selective shunting requires the use of some form of cerebral monitoring to assess the need for a shunt i.e. transcranial Doppler. There is insufficient evidence from randomised controlled trials comparing carotid endarterectomy performed under local and general anaesthetic [3]. Evidence from non-randomised studies suggests potential benefits with the use of local anaesthetic. This is a potential area for future research and randomised studies [3].
Epidemiology - There are approximately 130,000 strokes per year in England and Wales of which approximately 15-25% are caused by an abnormally narrow carotid artery [2]. It is estimated that approx 10% of people &gt; 80 years &amp; 5/1000 aged 50-60 yrs have a carotid artery stenosis &gt; than 50% [4]. The more severe the stenosis the greater the risk of a stroke and permanent disability for the patient [4].
The risk factors associated with carotid artery disease have been mentioned previously. Patients with high risk factors should be encouraged to reduce their risk factors e.g. through smoking cessation programs and dietary advice.
In 's case, the right internal carotid artery showed a more significant stenosis than the left internal carotid artery. However, the decision was made to perform the endartectomy on the left as this was the side producing the emboli responsible for 's TIA's. The left artery posed a greater problem for  in terms of future disability as there was a greater risk of stroke from this side. It is important that patients receive adequate explanation and reassurance as to the reasons for surgery particularly if as in 's case there are differing degrees of stenosis.
Ethical issues of non resuscitation -  requested not to be resuscitated if the need arose during the operation. Patient requests for non resuscitation should always be documented in the patient's notes. The patient may already have an advance directive a copy of which will need to be obtained.
Indications for surgery - asymptomatic and symptomatic patients
Use of transcranial Doppler ultrasound as a means of monitoring emboli production from the atheromatous plaque, pre, peri and post operatively.
Use of long term medical management of a patient with a symptomatic carotid artery stenosis.