Patient was interviewed on
In summary This indicates that the pain around the umbilicus is referred pain from the midgut (midgut structures being distal duodenum, jejunum, ileum, caecum, appendix, ascending colon and 2/3 transverse colon). This occurs due to the contraction of smooth muscle against resistance in e.g. ureters, intestine. The pain could therefore be referred from the small intestine. Causes of acute abdominal pain from the small intestine could be due to small bowel obstruction - the four cardinal symptoms of intestinal obstruction are:
The first three symptoms have been illustrated in the history and so the Small bowel obstruction is commonly caused by adhesions due to scars from previous surgery. From   However, this most commonly occurs post operatively or can be due to anticholinergic agents - none of which apply to Bowel sounds are normally found to be tinkling in small bowel obstruction. Other causes of small bowel obstruction include; malignancy (very rare in small intestine and
The pain in the right iliac fossa could be due to a hernia and so the Small bowel obstruction could result from a strangulation of the bowel and this occurs frequently in femoral hernias as the neck of the femoral canal is narrow. It is important to identify a strangulated femoral hernia/strangulated bowel as they are associated with a high mortality rate. Features suggesting strangulation to look for on examination include; rapid pulse, pyrexia, colicky pain becoming continuous as peritonitis develops, tenderness and abdominal rigidity.
Midgut pain which radiates to the right iliac fossa is also indicative of appendicitis. There is often guarding over the site of the appendix (McBurneys point) on examination due to the inflammatory process spreading to involve the wall of the peritoneum producing localised intense pain which is continuous and so this should be looked for on examination. However the initial midgut pain is often dull in nature and becomes severe when the peritoneum is involved. Bowel sounds are often absent as the abdomen becomes tender and rigid. Appendicitis is also associated with vomiting which The patient is normally pyrexic and tachycardic and so these should also be noted on examination.
On observation and examination the patient was apyrexial and tachycardic. A nasogastric tube was in situ for aspiration of gastric contents as The distension of the abdomen and resonance on percussion indicate that the distension is due to gas and not free fluid. Tenderness in the right iliac fossa and a palpable lump may indicate the presence of a femoral hernia. Given that bowel sounds were present (and the patient presented with pain) an ileus can be ruled out (functional obstruction due to reduced bowel motility). Appendicitis can also be ruled out as Bowel sounds were also high pitched indicating obstruction of the bowel. The likely diagnosis at this point could be either an obstructed femoral hernia or obstruction due to adhesions as a result of
Unfortunately, Sputum samples were sent and treatment was advised by the microbiologist - Amoxicillin 500mg TDS for 7 days. The wound from the second operation also became infected and purulent discharge was drained. Swabs of the discharge were taken and were found to be MRSA positive. The consultant microbiologist advised the following treatment for a period of 5 days and to then review:
A referral was made to the tissue viability nurse who advised that the wound be treated with VAC therapy. The dietician was also contacted and advised that
Later swabs of the infected wound were still MRSA positive - the consultant microbiologist advised that a static dose of vancomycin 1g over 90 mins should be given. It was also advised that the condition of the wound be assessed as it may be colonised with MRSA but not infected elsewhere. Assessment of the wound showed that it was colonised and so treatment was stopped. Referral to
Many cases of small bowel obstruction will settle on conservative treatment but in patients with an increasing temperature, raised pulse rate, increasing pain and a raised white cell count, exploratory laparotomy is needed. It is important to try and manage the obstruction conservatively through drip and suck as further surgery could increase the risk of recurrent adhesions and therefore repeat episodes of bowel obstruction. In patients with simple or partial obstruction, resolution occurs in virtually all patients with within 72 hours [1]. If the bowel is gangrenous due to strangulation then a gut resection is needed.
It is important to recognise a potential case of strangulated femoral hernia. Evidence has shown that if untreated, strangulated obstructions cause death in 100% of patients. If surgery is performed within 36 hours, the mortality decreases to 8%. The mortality rate is 25% if the surgery is postponed beyond 36 hours in these patients [1].
Over 80% of cases of small bowel obstruction in adults are due to adhesions [2]. Other common causes are hernias and Crohns Disease. Adhesions can occur after abdominal surgery, and can cause bowel obstruction either in the early or late postoperative period. Early postoperative adhesions are often formed of fibrin (fibrinous adhesions) and can be a transient occurrence. Adhesions that present months or years after surgery are more permanent and are formed of fibrous tissue (fibrous adhesions). Bowel obstruction caused by either fibrinous or fibrous adhesions may settle with conservative management although a laparotomy may be necessary.
Obstruction of the small bowel leads to proximal dilatation of the intestine due to accumulation of GI secretions and swallowed air. This bowel dilatation stimulates cell secretory activity resulting in more fluid accumulation. This leads to increased peristalsis both above and below the obstruction with frequent loose stools and flatus early in its course.
Vomiting occurs if the level of obstruction is proximal. Increasing small-bowel distention leads to increased intraluminal pressures. This can cause compression of mucosal lymphatics leading to bowel wall lymphedema. With even higher intraluminal hydrostatic pressures, increased hydrostatic pressure in the capillary beds results in massive third spacing of fluid, electrolytes, and proteins into the intestinal lumen. The fluid loss and dehydration that ensue may be severe and contribute to increased morbidity and mortality [1].
MRSA is a huge problem for hospitals nationwide. Immediate, effective medication is vital in order to treat the infection and prevent further wound dehisence.
Physical findings in small bowel obstruction
The importance of surgical history in small bowel obstruction
The management of small bowel obstruction - Adhesive Obstruction - initially managed conservatively
Suck and drip is indicated when the obstruction is one of repeated episodes due to massive intra abdominal adhesions, rendering surgery hazardous and where a short period of observation with conservative treatment is indicated. Conservative treatment is abandoned if there is increased distension, aggravation of pain, increase in abdominal tenderness or rise in pulse.
Use of NG tube - Nasogastric tube for gastric aspiration, aims to decompress the bowel and removes the risk of inhalation of gastric contents during induction of anaesthesia. IV fluid replacement - normal saline to replace fluid lost during vomiting
Refeeding syndrome - This is a syndrome of hypophosphataemia, hypomagnesaemia, hypocalcaemia and fluid retention which is seen in severely malnourished patients when they are started on enteral or parenteral nuitrition. When the patient is straved, total body loss of these minerals is compensated for by movement of ions out from the cells into plasma, to maintain near normal plasma levels. When feeding is started the increase in insulin level encourages ions to move intracellularly and plasma concentrations fall. Thiamine deficiency may also be a feature. Life-theatening dysrhythmias and congestive cardiac failure can result.
Vac therapy - vacuum assisted closure of wounds. The treatment pulls excess fluid and bacteria from the wound site improving blood flow to the wound bed aiding the healing process.
Symptoms of small bowel obstruction include:
Colicky abdominal pain, felt in mid-abdomen. Need to know site, radiation, duration and relieving factors.
no flatus, constipation is present
distention, early in the course of the illness if the obstruction is high - seen as
vomiting, earlier if the obstruction is relatively proximal in the bowel
Signs:
dehydration due to loss of fluid from ECF when vomiting. (the gastrointestinal tract secretes 6 litres of fluid per day and during obstruction, this tends to be sequestered) Hypovolaemia may result in hypotension and tachycardia.
inspection and palpation may reveal scars, distension, peristalsis, hernias, but no tenderness. If the blood supply is cut off then tenderness develops.
auscultation: hyperactive - borborygmus - or ileus
rectal examination: may be empty after 24 to 48 hours of symptoms