On
From the history and mental state examination
 There is no real improvement in his psychological symptoms and he has now started to develop somatic symptoms (constipation), which may indicate that his depression is becoming more severe. Unfortunately there is no opportunity at present to move
Schizophrenia is viewed as a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by an interaction of genetic and environmental factors. The neurodevelopmental hypothesis suggests that "factors acting during gestation may increase the risk of schizophrenia through an effect on intra uterine brain development" [4]. Such factors include viral infection in utero and obstetric complications. Genetic factors are also thought to play a role in schizophrenia and several susceptibility genes have been identified [5]. Altered neurotransmission is considered to play a key role in the expression of schizophrenic symptoms. It was initially thought that a high level of dopamine transmission in the mesolimbic area of the brain, was responsible for the positive, psychotic symptoms seen in schizophrenia. Imaging and post mortem findings have led to the development of a dual hypothesis in which a reduced level of dopamine activity in the prefrontal cortex is associated with the negative and cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia [6].
The course of schizophrenia varies, approx 10% of patients never recover from their first schizophrenic episode and approximately 80% do recover [6]. In most cases schizophrenia has a remitting/relapsing course and a depressive state normally follows the resolution of an acute psychotic episode. However, there is little research on the aetiology, course, prognosis or treatment of post schizophrenic depression. As depression is associated with a high risk of suicide, the management of such symptoms is an important part of improving prognosis in patients with schizophrenia. The depressive symptoms are usually treated with antidepressants, however, there is no substantial evidence to support their use [7] and further research is obviously needed in this area. This atypical antipsychotic has also been shown to reduce depressive symptoms in patients with unipolar psychotic depression [8] and so may reduce the severity of post schizophrenic depressive symptoms. An important part of management is to reduce the risk of further relapse and it has been shown that psychoeducational approaches can help to reduce readmission rates compared with standard care [9]. A multidisciplinary team approach must be taken to ensure that all factors contributing to potential relapse are managed.
Taking a full psychiatric history and the importance of obtaining collateral information to confirm features of the history and past psychiatric illnesses etc.
The difficulties in trying to diagnose a patient within the ICD 10 classification system as patients may have complex cases with symptoms applicable to a range of diagnoses.
It is important to identify the most prominent symptoms in order to reach an appropriate diagnosis and develop an effective management plan.
The importance of social and psychological inputs into a patient's management plan and the various methods of achieving this.
The risk of patients becoming dependent on the ward