was referred to the mental health services in  with a history of severe stomach cramps and a long history of problems with her eating habits and weight. This was the first time that  had felt ready to accept help for her eating behaviour.
From the history and mental state examination  is a 30-year-old lady who is currently presenting with a diagnosis of an Eating Disorder F50.
The most likely diagnosis for 's current behaviour is  Atypical Bulimia Nervosa F50.3. This is supported by 's current binge eating behaviour of "rubbish food" and subsequent "purging" activities to control her body weight i.e. excessive exercise and induced vomiting. There is an excessive preoccupation with her body weight and eating habits to the extent that she feels it interferes with her lifestyle.  also suffers from palpitations, which could be a result of the repeated vomiting and consequent electrolyte disturbance.  displays some of the features of Bulimia Nervosa F50.2 but not the full clinical picture. For example, there have been no significant changes in her weight over the past 5 years, which is often characteristic of individuals with Bulimia Nervosa. Also,  does not possess a "strong desire to overeat" consistently as in Bulimia Nervosa, this only occurs when she is feeling particularly anxious, stressed or low.
strives to maintain an "ideal weight of 58Kg" rather than deliberately trying to lose weight which is more characteristic of Anorexia Nervosa F50.0. The last time  weighed herself she was 58 Kg (although  feels she has put on weight) giving her a BMI of approx 20.1 Kg/M 2. This would discount a diagnosis of Anorexia Nervosa in which the BMI is usually <17.5 Kg/M 2.  has not experienced any problems with her menstrual cycle which is another common feature associated with Anorexia Nervosa. 's eating behaviours appear to be exacerbated when  is felling stressed or anxious. There is also a correlation with relationships, when  feels settled her behaviour improves, when she feels insecure her behaviour deteriorates.
The history of 's eating behaviour would support a past diagnosis of Anorexia Nervosa F50.0. When her eating behaviour was at its worse, 's weight fell to 6 stone, which would have reduced her BMI dramatically. This diagnosis is also supported by the physical problems that  experienced at the time as a result of her eating behaviours - loss head hair, dry skin. A previous history of Anorexia Nervosa is a common finding in patients diagnosed with Bulimia Nervosa [1].
The trigger to 's history of anorexia may have been the parental disharmony that she witnessed as a child and her mother's consequent depression and suicide attempts. 's parents separated when she was 20 years old, prior to this there had been consistent arguing between the parents during 's late teens. This correlates with the point in her life when her behavioural symptoms were at their worse and her weight decreased to 6 stone. Since this episode, 's eating behaviours appear to be related to her relationships and  has recognised that her behaviour is worse when she is feeling stressed or anxious. At the time of the her parents separation, 's eating behaviour had improved although she was beginning to exercise more. This may have provided an alternative outlet for her tension and anxiety and  has maintained this exercise regime since. Recent stresses with the sale of the house have precipitated "naughty" behaviour and the recurrence of her binge/purge behaviours.
The association between 's eating behaviours and anxiety/stress states may suggest an underlying Generalised Anxiety Disorder F41.1. However, there are no physical symptoms relating to 's anxiety state and so this is discounted as the primary diagnosis.
shows symptoms indicative of an Obsessive Compulsive Disorder F42 in that she:
has obsessional thoughts about her weight and dietary intake
displays rituals regarding binge/purge behaviour
describes herself as feeling anxious
is a perfectionist who likes order
However,  currently displays no symptoms of depression, depersonalisation or abnormal slowness associated with this diagnosis.  may therefore have underlying personality traits e.g. obsessionality, low self esteem, perfectionism, which have predisposed her to develop these eating behaviours. An organic cause for 's eating behaviours is unlikely, however clinical investigations may help to eliminate e.g. an endocrine cause.
is currently being seen in the outpatient clinic on a 3 monthly basis.  has not yet been seen by a psychologist but has been actively reading self-help books to gain a greater understanding of her problems.
Prevalance - In community based studies, the prevalence of BN is between 0.5% and 1.0% in young women with an even social class distribution [5]. Approximately 90% of people diagnosed with BN are women [5].
Prognosis - A 10 year follow up study found that 52% had fully recovered and only 9% continued to experience full symptoms of BN [5]. If the illness is identified early enough, the prognosis is good.
The serotonin theory for BN suggests that there is a low serotonin level in the brains of people who are irritable, depressed and anxious. If an individual binges on carbohydrate rich foods, the level of trytophan in their blood is raised. A high level of tryptohan in the blood enables some to cross the blood brain barrier and stimulate the synthesis and release of serotonin which relieves the dysphoric mood and the individual feels relaxed [5]. This theory may explain why SSRI's have been found to reduce the frequency of binge/purge behaviours in individuals with BN [8]. Research suggests that the level of vasopressin in the brain is also found to be abnormal in people with eating disorders and OCD. The hormone is normally released in response to physical and possibly emotional stress, and may therefore contribute to the obsessive behaviour seen in some patients with eating disorders [9]. The effect of the menstrual cycle and hormonal changes on eating behaviours is a possible area for future research as  recognised that her eating behaviours were exaggerated on week before her period.
According to Lacey (1986), manipulation of eating behaviour is an individuals defence mechanism and a coping mechanism for dealing with emotional stress. Cognitive behavioural therapy focuses on the thoughts, behaviour, feeling cycle and helps to:
Eliminate behavioural patterns and develop new ones
Modify negative/irrational thoughts and beliefs
Develop adaptive responses to situations
CBT achieves full remission in 40% of patients with bulimia nervosa [10] and is recommended by NICE guidelines in the management of BN [9]. CBT has been shown to reduce the specific symptoms of BN and also improve non-specific symptoms such as depression [5].
Organising a complex psychiatric history
Difference between Anorexia Nervosa and Bulimia Nervosa
Signs to look for on physical examination
Identifying a suitable diagnosis using the ICD 10 classification system as patients may have symptoms applicable to a range of diagnoses.