was referred to the fracture follow up clinic at  hospital on  after being seen at A &amp; E on  following an ankle injury
The mechanism of injury suggests that  has sustained an acute traumatic inversion injury to his right ankle. Injuries around the ankle joint can damage the bones, ligaments and soft tissues and the mechanism and force of the injury determines the extent of this damage.
A sprained ankle is a common inversion injury with twisting of the weight bearing foot. The lateral ligament of the ankle joint is more commonly injured as it is weaker than the medial ligament. The lateral ligament is composed of 3 parts:
During an inversion injury the fibres of the anterior talofibular ligament are the first to be damaged, as they are the weakest component. The mechanism of 's injury would suggest damage to the lateral aspect of the ankle joint as this was described as being the site of most severe pain and swelling immediately after the injury.  may have sustained a strain or tearing injury to his lateral ligament. On examination, a ligament is more likely to be a strained if bruising is light and torn if bruising is severe. The anterior talofibular ligament extends anteromedially from the lateral malleolus to the neck of the talus. On examination pain may therefore be felt over the anterior part of the ankle joint where the ligament has its attachment.
In severe sprains following an inversion injury, the lateral malleolus of the fibula may also be fractured. This is supported by the fact that  felt unable to weight bear on the limb immediately after the injury. The Ottawa ankle rules suggest that if the patient is unable to weight bear immediately after the injury or at the time of x-ray, there is an increased risk of a clinically significant fracture and an unstable injury. However this is not diagnostic. If the malleolus is pushed off it usually fracture obliquely, if it is pulled off it fractures transversely.
Weight bearing on the joint should be assessed on examination. Clinical examination may help to determine whether there is any bony deformity in 's joint. Any asymmetry to the contour of the ankle joint may indicate that an underlying fracture has become angulated or displaced.  does not remember hearing any significant noises when he injured the ankle to indicate that a fracture might have occurred. There is no previous history of trauma to the right ankle to indicate any weakness in the stability of the joint. The entire length of the fibula should be examined for tenderness to rule out a more proximal fracture. Examination of the joint above and below the injured joint should also be conducted to rule out any concomitant injury. The limb should also be examined for any signs of neurovascular deficit.
The findings on examination are supportive of a fracture to the distal fibula.  was able to weight bear on the ankle suggesting that the fracture is stable, however this will be confirmed on x-ray. Tenderness was also elicited on palpation of the anterior aspect of the ankle joint line. This would suggest that the anterior talofibular ligament has also been damaged. No tenderness was palpable over the fifth metatarsal, proximal fibula or the knee joint suggesting that there are no concomitant injuries at these points.
Ankle fractures are classified according to the Lauge Hansen and the Danis Weber AO classification systems:
Lauge Hansen system is based on the suspected mechanism of injury. In each category the injury begins in a specific anatomic location and progresses sequentially about the ankle creating the injury described. The mechanism of  injury would be classified according to the Supination External Rotation (SER) category:
SE I - Disruption of anterior tibiofibular ligament
SE II - Spiral oblique fracture of the distal fibula originating near the level of the tibial plafond
SE III - Disruption of the posterior tibiofibular ligament or fracture of posterior malleolus
SE IV - Oblique fracture of medial malleolus or rupture of deltoid ligament
The examination is consistent with an SE II fracture of the lateral malleolus of the right ankle as there is localised tenderness over this area. There is no tenderness posteriorly or medially to indicate an SE III or IV fracture.
Danis Weber classification AO system is based on the level of the fibula fracture:
Type A - fibula fracture below tibiofibular syndesmosis
Type B - fibula fracture at level of syndesmosis
Type C - fibula fracture above syndesmosis
Both classifications can be confirmed by radiological examination.
is a 24 year old male who has sustained a SE II injury to the right ankle.
Physically - 's mobility is obviously impaired and he is reliant on crutches to mobilise at present. It is unlikely that  will require a significant time of work to recover as his current employment does not require a lot of weight bearing.
Psychologically -  did not appear to be affected psychologically by the injury he has sustained. However recovery from the fracture will require patience on his part so that the bone and soft tissues are given adequate time to heal and he may feel apprehensive about putting weight on the ankle joint initially.
Socially -  currently lives at home and feels that he will be well supported by his parents during his recovery. It is important that his parents encourage him to mobilise gradually.
The patient has been issued with a follow up appointment for 5 weeks time to be seen in the fracture review clinic.
The ankle is a weight bearing joint which can withstand forces of up to five times an individuals body weight during walking and running [1]. The fibula itself bears up to 1/6/ individual's body weight. Ankle ligament injuries occur frequently and if associated with fractures have a prolonged healing period [1]. Management of fractures can be divided into operative and non-operative. The choice between the two depends on the type of fracture, its stability and the patients age.
The fracture is classified as being stable or unstable - a stable fracture requires minimal splinting whereas an unstable fracture may require reduction and internal fixation. Fractures above the level of the tibial plafond are assumed to include an injury to the syndesmosis. These fractures are very unstable and a syndesmosis screw is usually required to stabilise the injury. When reviewing x-rays of ankle injuries it is important to check for the 5 most commonly missed foot and ankle fractures (mnemonic FLOAT):
In the case of , the x-ray confirmed a Weber B/SE II fracture to the right lateral malleolus. The fracture was not displaced and was therefore classified as stable. In the past such fractures have been managed using casts or braces. However, it is now thought that unconstrained movements of an isolated lateral malleolus injury do not lead to abnormal joint kinetics. Therefore, many of these fractures are now managed without a cast and with immediate weight bearing when comfortable for the patient.
A comparison of two conservative methods of treatment for isolated SE II fractures of the lateral malleolus showed that treatment consisting of immediate weight-bearing and mobilisation resulted in earlier rehabilitation than 4 weeks immobilisation in a plaster cast [2]. The same study found that there were no reported complications associated with early mobilisation of the SE II fractures and no difference in the pain experienced by the two groups [2]. These findings were supported by another study in which patients were treated with an elastic bandage and immediate weight bearing [3]. However, both studies contained groups of a small size and so further evidence is needed to confirm such findings. Early mobilisation reduces muscle wasting in the leg promoting a quicker recovery. The fracture should be reviewed and x-rayed after a few weeks to ensure the fracture has not become displaced.
In the case of a fracture, most patients would expect to be placed into a plaster cast to enable the fracture to heal. However this is not always the case as has been highlighted by Mr . It is important to explain to the patient the reason why the fracture does not require a cast. The fibula obviously plays an important role in the stability of the ankle joint and the mortise structure. However, should a section of bone be required for transplant to another region, the fibula is often the bone of choice.
It is also to have an idea of the type of lifestyle the patient leads. If the individual is unlikely to be able to rest the fracture and then a cast may help to improve healing by preventing excessive movement of the injury which could lead to non union.