was admitted to  hospital on the  for a right elective total knee replacement carried out on the .  has suffered with osteoarthritis of the right knee for approximately 10 years but stated that the she has been experiencing increased pain in her right knee over the past 3-4months.
The most likely cause of 's right knee pain is osteoarthritis (and this was indeed her diagnosis). Osteoarthritis is a disease of the synovial joints characterised by loss of articular cartilage and periarticular bone response (osteophytes, bone cysts, subchondral bone sclerosis). By the age of 40 90% of all people have some degenerative changes in the weight bearing joints [1] and the prevalence of OA increases with age. OA can affect many joints with the hip and knee being the major cause of disability.
described three of the above characteristic symptoms of OA (highlighted) supporting such a diagnosis. ' symptoms have been getting progressively worse and this is another salient feature of OA. Symptoms of OA are generally worse in one knee although both knee joints can be affected.
Signs to look for on examination to support a diagnosis of OA are tenderness on palpation of the right knee joint, crepitus of the patellofemoral joint on movement and a limitation of the range of movement. The knee joint may also be unstable with evidence of effusion and wasting of the quadriceps muscles. Palpation of osteophytes along the joint line may be possible. There may also be a varus deformity of the leg depending on which compartment of the knee joint if most affected by the arthritis.
Differential Diagnoses:
Referred pain from the hip joint - Although  describes the pain she feels as being related to the knee it is vital that the hips are examined. Pain from the hip joint can radiate to the knee as both joints have the same nerve supply.
Inflammatory Arthritis e.g. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) - RA is a systemic inflammatory arthritis involving small and large joints. Pain and stiffness is worse in the morning and can last for several hours compared to OA where the post rest pain is of shorter duration. On examination the knees are painful, swollen (due to synovial thickening) and warm to the touch. Bow-leg, knock knee, or flexion deformity may occur.  did not report pain in any other joints making this a less likely diagnosis. On x-ray the bone appears osteopaenic compared to OA where the bone is sclerosed.  does not report any non articular manifestations associated with RA e.g. - scleritis, vasculitis, subcutaneous nodules
Gout and Pseudogout - gout is characterised by recurrent attacks of acute synovitis. It affects mainly the peripheral joints e.g. toes, ankle and small joints of the hand but can affect the larger joints such as the knee. Signs to look for on examination are redness, a hot joint on palpation, swelling and gouty tophi around the joints (especially the olecranon and in the pinna of the ear). In an acute attack, the onset is very sudden and so this is an unlikely diagnosis in  who has had symptoms for a number of years. Pseudogout more commonly affects the knee but is usually asymptomatic and therefore an unlikely diagnosis in .
Polymyalgia Rheumatica - Form of giant cell arteritis causing postrest stiffness and weakness. The pain is usually most severe around the pelvic and pectoral girdles with the tenderness arising from the muscles rather than the joints making this an unlikely diagnosis for . However, she has been diagnosed with this condition and so it should still be considered as a possible cause for her pain.
Trauma - fracture or damage to the ligament or cartilage of the knee joint - This is an unlikely diagnosis for  as there was no history of trauma and 's pain has been chronic and progressive in nature.
The examination supports a working diagnosis of osteoarthritis in 's right knee. Classical signs of OA were elicited on examination - joint line tenderness on palpation with crepitus and pain on movement, varus deformity of right leg. Flexion was also limited in the right knee.  displayed an antalgic gait due to the pain she experiences on walking.
On examination there was no redness or swelling of any other joints and no temperature difference between the 2 knees. There were no gouty tophi or rheumatic nodules present on examination and there is no known family history of such conditions. Such findings make the diagnosis of gout or rheumatoid arthritis less likely.
No abnormality could be found in 's hips ruling out the possibility of referred pain from the hip joint. There is no recent or past history of trauma as a possible cause of pain in the knee.
Radiological examination will confirm the working diagnosis of OA. Classic signs to look for are:
Osteoarthritis can be graded according to the severity of cartilage damage, however this is only possible during arthroscopy or at the time of surgery:
Grade 1 - Softening
Grade 2 - Fibrillation
Grade 3 - Fissures
Grade 4 - Denuding
is an elderly lady who has been admitted for an elective total right knee replacement.  is slightly anxious about the surgery but is keen to have the operation in order to reduce her pain and improve her mobility.
Physical - 's independence is limited by the pain she experiences from her right knee. Despite  having a stick to assist with walking and the pain being most severe when climbing the stairs, she feels unable to walk comfortably on the flat for fear of aggravating the pain.
Social -  is close to both of her daughters and sees them as often as possible. The decrease in 's mobility has meant that she has had to rely on her daughters for help with shopping etc.
Psychological -  has suffered with pain from her right knee for over 10 years. Until recently,  stated that the pain was bearable. However over the last 3-4 months the pain has increased in severity and  was obviously concerned over the effects on her mobility.  also stated that she can feel low on occasion as she feels like a burden to her daughters who both have their own family commitments.
is recovering on the orthopaedic ward of  hospital
The knee joint is one of the commonest causes of disability from OA with the medial compartment most commonly affected. The pain and limited movement experienced by patients with OA imposes a huge physical disability to the individual. This can reduce a patient's quality of life and lead to further morbidity.
The main principle in the treatment of OA is to treat the patients symptoms and disability and not the radiological appearance of the OA. The aim should be to alleviate pain, improve function and decrease disability. The patient should also be educated about OA and its management.
Treatment:
Non-pharmacological - Initially management is focused at weight loss with strengthening and exercise of the muscles surrounding the knee joint. This helps to improve the stability of the joint and reduce the pressure placed on it. Pressure on the joint can also be relived through the use of walking aids.
Pharmacological - Initially, simple analgesia should be prescribed to reduce the pain associated with OA. Once these prove to be ineffective, NSAIDS should be used intermittently. If the pain is still severe, intra articular corticosteroid injections can produce short-term improvement in joint pain [2]. A gradual decrease in the effectiveness of such injections indicates an increase in severity of the disease. Limited evidence has shown that intra articular glucocorticoid injections into the joint reduced pain for 1-4 weeks compared with placebo [3]. However, studies have also shown that overuse of corticosteroids can lead to progression of the disease [1]. Hyaluronic Acid injections may offer a longer more durable response with improvement in pain and function when compared to Corticosteroids [2]. The public sector has been overwhelmed with publicity regarding the effectiveness of Glucosamine in the treatment and prevention of osteoarthritis. Previous reviews have shown that Glucosamine taken for 6 weeks decreased pain and improved function in people with OA [4]. However, poor quality of trials and publication bias has questioned the reliability of such information. Further research and clarification in this area is needed and may help to optimise future management of OA.
Surgery - is indicated in patients who are not gaining any benefit from non operative management.
1) Tibial Osteotomy - can correct the varus deformity of medical compartment OA and adjust the line of weight bearing so that the healthy compartment takes more weight. The operation is not always effective and the patient normally requires a TKR at a later date [5]. This option was not indicated for  due to the presence of OA in the lateral compartment of her knee (even though at present this was not the main source of her pain).
2) Low Femoral osteotomy - for patients with a valgus deformity of &gt; 10 degrees and wearing of the lateral compartment.
3) Hemi arthroplasty - Lateral and Medial components of the knee joint are replaced (femoral and tibial surfaces).
4) TKR - All three compartments of the knee (medial, lateral and patella) are replaced. The articulating surfaces are replaced with metal and plastic prostheses to provide a low friction interface. Evidence has shown that TKR provides patients with pain relief, increased function and an improvement in quality of life [6].
The surgery performed on  was a tricompartmental TKR. A review of tricompartmental prostheses identified 154 studies of 37 different prostheses in 9879 people [8]. Good or excellent outcomes were reported in 89% of these people [7]. The pain  felt was primarily due to osteoarthritic changes in the medial compartment of her right knee. Unicompartmental knee replacements are possible, indeed one RCT found that unicompartmental knee replacements were more effective than tricompartmental replacement at 5 years follow up [8]. However, 's x-rays showed osteoarthritic changes both at the patella and the lateral compartment of the right knee. A total knee replacement was therefore more suitable for  in order to prevent the need for future surgery to the remaining degenerative parts of the knee.
In the healthy knee, the Posterior Cruciate Ligament acts as an anterior constraint for movement of the femur on the tibia providing the knee joint with posterior stability. A total knee replacement aims to reproduce movements of the knee and the stability of the joint, therefore retaining the PCL will obviously assist with this. At present the decision to retain the PCL depends on its degenerative status, the type of implant used or just personal preference [9]. A possible area for research would be to investigate the advantages/disadvantages of retaining or sacrificing the PCL in a total knee replacement.
Approximately 30,000 TKR are carried out in England and Wales each year and it is estimated that the need for all joint replacements will increase by approx 40% over the next 30 years [10]. One of the main reasons for the prospected increase is the growing size of the ageing population. It is thought that the average total knee replacement lasts for approximately 15 years, however this depends on a number of factors relating to the patient including their age, level of activity and weight.
Knee arthritis is slightly more common than hip arthritis, in women over the age of 74 the incidence is 43 per 1000 [11]. It is estimated that 20 per 1000 people in the general population would benefit from total knee replacement, however many of these individuals are not referred for surgery despite 4 per 1000 having extreme disability [11]. The management of waiting lists is major political issue; current thinking suggests that a standardised priority assessment criterion for common elective procedures such as total knee replacement should be introduced [11]. Patients will be prioritised according to a clinical scoring system, which will prioritise patients according to the pain and disability associated with their knee arthritis [10].
Complications of total knee replacement are as for all forms of surgery but also include:
Patellofemoral complications - including patellofemoral instability, fracture patella, failure of patella component, patella clunk syndrome, and extensor mechanism tendon rupture. These are some of the most common reasons for re operation.
Aseptic loosening - Loosening of the prosthesis occurs at a rate of approx 5-10% of patients at 10-15 years. The aetiology is not fully understood, loosening of the prostheses leads to mechanical instability and ultimately failure of the prosthesis.
Arthrofibrosis - excessive scar tissue formation causing restriction of knee movement. This occurs in less than 1% of patients and the aetiology is unknown. Conservative management includes anti-inflammatory medication, physiotherapy, and reassurance. In severe cases the joint may need to be replaced and if this fails the joint may need to be fused [12].
It is therefore important that patients are informed of the possible complications of surgery so that they are able to make an appropriate informed decision. Surgery poses risks at any ages but in the case of  who also has significant co morbidity, the risks are increased and it is important that  understands this.