The carpal tunnel is a narrow fibro-osseous canal bound by the carpal bones and superiorly the flexor retinaculum. The 'tunnel' contains the median nerve and the nine extrinsic flexors of the fingers and thumb with their synovial sheaths. The median nerve supplies motor innervation to the three muscles of the thenar eminence - Abductor Pollicis Brevis, Opponens Pollicis and Flexor Pollicis Brevis and the 1 It also supplies sensory innervation to the thumb, medial three fingers and radial side of the ring finger. A sensory branch of the median nerve originates proximal to the carpal tunnel and provides sensation to the thenar eminence. In the normal carpal tunnel there is barely room for all of the tendons and the median nerve. If there is a decrease in the size of the canal or an increase in the volume of contents, structure will inevitably be compressed.
In carpal tunnel syndrome, patients present with symptoms of tingling and numbness in the hand due to compression of the median nerve. Sensation is altered in the distribution of the median nerve (the thenar eminence is spared due to the sensory branch supplying this region originating proximal to the carpal tunnel). The ulnar nerve supplies the little finger and the lateral side of the ring finger and so sensation here should also be normal on examination.
Specific tests for examination to support working diagnosis:
Phalens Test: Hold the wrist fully flexed for a couple of minutes - sensory symptoms may be reproduced
Tinnels Test: Percuss over the flexor retinaculum (median nerve) to elicit sensory symptoms
Positive Pressure: Apply pressure to the midpoint of the Flexor Retinaculum to elicit sensory symptoms.
Weakness of thumb abduction - due to loss of innervation to the Abductor Pollicis Brevis muscle
Differential diagnosis:
 Symptoms are similar to those seen in CTS, however night pain is uncommon and pain in the forearm is common. On examination, Phalens test is negative and the pain can be elicited by resisting flexion of the elbow with the arm in supination (to tighten the biciptal aponeurosis). Nerve conduction studies are used to localize the level of the compression.
 Symptoms include motor weakness but no changes to sensation. The anterior interosseous nerve supplies flexor digitorum profundus (FDP), flexor pollicis longus (FPL) and pronator quadratus. On examination the patient is unable to make the 'ok' sign i.e. pinching with the thumb and index finger joints flexed, due to weakness of the FPL and FDP muscles.
The findings on examination support a diagnosis of Carpal Tunnel Syndrome. The examination would support this as both Phalens and the pressure test were positive in the right hand.
Sensation was intact bilaterally on each little finger indicating no ulnar nerve involvement. On examination the anterior interosseous nerve was also intact. No pain was elicited on resisted flexion of the elbow in supination indicating that the median nerve was not being compressed proximally.
The positive family history of Rheumatoid Arthritis would support this as a possible cause for Another possible cause for There is no evidence of metabolic or connective tissue disorders from the history or examination as a possible cause. X-rays of the wrist may be implicated to discount a fracture, tumour or arthritis as possible causes of median nerve compression.
Nerve Conduction studies can be used to localise the area of nerve compression and confirm the working diagnosis, they are based on 4 principal measurements:
 The symptoms she experiences are also aggravated by movements she makes as part of her occupation i.e. typing. The symptoms are also affecting her ability to carry out many activities of daily living i.e. holding a brush, kettle
The symptoms of CTS can cause prolonged disability and time off work for many individuals. Indeed in 1999, carpal tunnel syndrome ranked the highest in respect to number of days away from work amongst work place injuries in the United States [1].
Nocturnal wrist splints can be used to retain the hand in neutral alignment and prevent flexion of the wrist and therefore reduce symptoms. Evidence has shown that nocturnal splinting provides a significant improvement in symptoms compared to no treatment [2].
Due to the waiting list for operations such as Carpal Tunnel release, many patients require interim treatment to enable them to continue with their occupational duties. Oral Prednisolone has been shown to significantly improve symptoms over a short time period i.e. 2- 4weeks compared to placebo [3]. However, oral prednisolone should only be prescribed as an interim intervention due to the side effects produced by corticosteroids e.g. osteoporosis, cushings syndrome. Corticosteroid injections are thought to relieve symptoms over a longer time period compared to oral corticosteroids although the duration of benefit requires further research [6].
For patients with severe symptoms, surgery is the most effective treatment option for relieving symptoms [4]. There are now 2 surgical options for release of the flexor retinaculum - open or endoscopic.
One RCT found that endoscopic carpal tunnel release was marginally more effective than open surgery in terms of functional status [8]. However the same article also concluded that endoscopic release was significantly more expensive than open surgical release [8]. Endoscopic release may therefore be less cost effective when compared to open surgical treatment.
Evidence shows that 34% of patient with idiopathic CTS had complete resolution of symptoms within 6 months of diagnosis [7]. Surgical intervention is therefore unnecessary in this group of individuals. Further research is warranted into the relative contributions of non-surgical forms of treatment and their duration of benefit.
Carpal Tunnel Syndrome has been accepted as the most common entrapment neuropathy. The condition does not follow a predictable course. Some patients experience deterioration in hand function with both motor and sensory effects whilst others describe silent periods and intermittent exacerbations of symptoms. Carpal Tunnel Syndrome has an important economic impact affecting active working people, most commonly females. It may occur as a work related disorder leading to compensation claims and so effective treatment is vital.
Although complication rates from surgery are low, the effects of permanent weakness in the muscles of the thenar eminence may affect patients ability to continue with their occupation (which may be the case for Therefore it is important to discuss the risks of the operation with the patient as resolution of symptoms may occur over time without intervention.