Elective admission on ,  is known to have Crohns Disease
Impression -  is a 23 year old lady who was diagnosed with Crohns Disease at the age of 7. Her symptoms have been well controlled by the medication. However over the past 12 months,  has noticed that her symptoms have become progressively worse with a marked increase in severity over the past 2 weeks.  presented with classic signs of exacerbation of her Crohns; 2 week history of diarrhoea, abdominal pain in the RIF and LUQ and weight loss.
The abdominal pain may be caused by inflammation and spasm of the small/large intestine during an acute exacerbation of Crohns. It may also be due to stricture formation as seen in chronic disease.
The diarrhoea  is experiencing may be due to a number of factors linked with her Crohns:
Drug induced and infective causes of diarrhoea must also be excluded in patients with Crohns Disease.
Infective - There are many infective causes for diarrhoea e.g. S. Aureus, E Coli and Salmonella, Rotavirus and Norwalk virus. Most infective causes of diarrhoea are acute and symptoms tend to resolve within 72 hours. Signs to look for on examination include:
Drug Induced (pseudomembranous colitis) - antibiotics e.g. Penicillins, Clindomycin and aminoglycosides can reduce the normal flora of the gut. This enables normal gut organisms such as Clostridium Difficile to grow. C Difficile produces a toxin which causes inflammation and necrosis of colonic mucosa resulting in diarrhoea.  had no evidence of such drug use in the past month from her history. Signs to look for on examination include distended abdomen with generalised tenderness.
There are three main subgroups of Crohns Disease:
The fistula pattern of presentation leads to formation of penetrating sinuses with fistula or abscess formation. The types of fistula that can form are: entero-enteric (between adjacent lops of bowel), enterogastric (between bowel and stomach), enterovesical (between bowel and bladder), enterocutaneous (between bowel and skin). The stricture pattern produces postprandial abdominal pain with constipation.
The locations of the abdominal pain point to pathology in the colon,  may have developed strictures in these regions. Stricture formation may also explain the occasional vomiting that  has experienced and the colicky abdominal pain. However one of the main symptoms  experiences is diarrhoea.
There were no significant findings on examination. Given the history, the most likely diagnosis is a flare up of 's Crohns. The presence of inflammation, obstruction, abscess, and fistula should be investigated to determine the type of Crohns that  has i.e. is there any stricture formation as a cause of 's nausea and colicky abdominal pain, as this will help to tailor her management.
had a subtotal colectomy, she recovered well from the operation and was coping with the stoma.
Crohns disease is a chronic condition that requires repeated treatment either medical or surgical. The main role of all treatment is to minimise symptoms and delay or prevent relapse. Due to the relapsing nature of the disease, the effect of treatment on the patients quality of life is an important factor in deciding on acute alterations to medical treatment or surgical intervention.
Current medical therapy involves the use of steroids which still provide the quickest and most reliable response to active Crohns. However, due to the relapsing nature of the disease many patients can become steroid dependent leading to an increased risk of the adverse side effects of steroids e.g. Cushings syndrome. Recent studies have shown that TNF alpha blocking agents are effective in inducing remission in Crohns Disease [1]. This may in turn decrease the dependency for steroids. NICE guidelines 2002, recommended the use of Infliximab for the treatment of severe active Crohns when treatment with immunomodulating drugs and corticosteroids has failed or is no tolerated and when surgery is inappropriate [2]. The approved dose is 5mg/Kg given as IV infusion preferably at 0, 2 and 6 weeks [3]. Research has now moved past the benefits of Infliximab and onto agents that inhibit leukocyte recruitment and block molecules such as IL-2 in the inflammatory pathway [3].
In contrast with ulcerative colitis approximately 50% of patients with moderately active Crohn's colitis were shown to respond to oral metronidazole for up to 3 months [4].
The average age of onset for patients with Crohns Disease is in the early decades of life, but the average life expectancy is the same as the general population [5]. Unfortunately the cost of treatment forms a major part of discussion in all aspects of health care delivery and Crohns Disease is no exception. Hospitalisation for surgery consumes a large portion of the total cost of treatment for Crohns [5}. Indeed one paper commented that therapy, which decreases the number of surgical hospitalisations for Crohns, would reduce the overall costs of caring for patients with the disease [5].
appears to be having no significant response to medical therapy and the option of surgery was discussed. Research has shown that quality of life improved 30 days post surgery in patients with Crohns Disease and that this improvement was unrelated to patient characteristics, nature of disease or intervention performed [6]. Indeed many patients who underwent surgery for Crohns Disease in the study felt that surgery had helped them and felt they would undergo surgery again [6].
Surgery is usually indicated for patients whose disease fails to respond to drug or dietary therapy. Resection is not curative and there is a 50% chance of recurrence that will require further surgery at 10 years [7]. Some patients prefer to opt for surgery at presentation rather than pharmacological or nutritional treatment of unknown duration. Unfortunately, there is no controlled data to confirm the best approach for patients [7].
There is a well-known association between ulcerative colitis and an increased risk of colorectal cancer, and patients with Crohns disease are believed to be at increased risk of cancer of the small intestine. Studies have shown that the relative risk of colorectal cancer in patients with Crohn's colitis is approximately 5.6 and should raise the same concerns as in patients with ulcerative colitis [8]. Surveillance should begin 8 - 10 years after disease onset for pancolitis and 15 - 20 years after onset for disease affecting the left side of the colon [8]. At the time of admission, 's colon only was affected by Crohns, she was diagnosed at the age of 7 and so regular surveillance to identify any dysplasia within the colon would have been indicated according to this paper.
Crohns disease affects between 30,000 and 60,000 people in the UK, (approximately 1 in 1200) with between 3,000 and 6,000 new cases diagnosed each year. Research shows that the number of people with Crohn's Disease has been rising steadily, particularly among young people [9].
The most effective prophylactic measure in patients with Crohns Disease is to refrain from smoking, the risk of relapse in non smokers at 3 years is approximately 30% lower than in smokers [1]. It is vital that the care of patients with Crohns disease includes advice on such lifestyle habits to prevent future exacerbations of the disease.
With the advances in research and the variety of treatment options available it is essential that the patient remains at the focus of the decision making process so that they are fully informed on all available treatment therapies. This will ensure that the most appropriate management plan is developed for the patient.