was brought to A&E by ambulance on  at 8.00pm with shortness of breath
Impression -  is an anxious 18 year old girl admitted to A&E with shortness of breath on a background of a recent chest infection
was found to be suffering from an acute asthma attack. 's PEFR on admission was 180 compared to her normal PEFR of 420.  was unable to talk in complete sentences on admission, her respiratory rate was 22 and her heart rate was 105. These signs indicate that 's asthma attack was severe based on:
Physically -  did not appear to be dyspnoeic at the time of examination but appeared to be quite lethargic, this is likely to be a result of the acute asthma attack and her recent chest infection. It is therefore important that her energy/nutrition levels are maintained to promote her recovery. During management of an acute asthma attack it is important to monitor the patients pO2 and pCO2 levels to recognise the need for ventilation.
Psychologically -  was frightened by the asthma attack and appeared to be anxious on examination.  is not normally affected by her asthma and only uses her ventolin inhaler approx 2-3 time/week. This episode distressed her and she is concerned hat she will be unable to control her asthma on discharge from hospital.  does not remember much about her state at the time of admission and this may be one of the reasons for her distress.
Socially -  social activities are not greatly limited by her asthma as it is usually well controlled with her inhalers.  may need to limit her physical activity over the next few weeks until she has recovered from the chest infection.  should be advised on ways of limiting her exposure to triggers of her asthma at home by e.g. using an anti allergy mattress, ensuing her living space is dust free.
responded to first line treatment of her acute asthma attack, she was kept in hospital overnight for observations and was discharged the following day.
Asthma exacerbations are potentially life threatening with hypoxemia being an important cause of death in these patients. Hypoxemia is produced by ventilation perfusion mismatch and so administration of inspired oxygen can usually correct this. Historically the use of high flow oxygen delivered by a mask and reservoir bag has been considered the best way of delivering oxygen to patients with an acute asthma attack. However recent studies have shown that hyperoxia may be unsafe for some patients as it can worsen the patients paCO2. One RCT compared the effect of 2 oxygen concentrations on gas exchange in adult patients with severe acute asthma. The study concluded that administration of 100% oxygen for 20 minutes significantly increased paCO2 and decreased PEFR compared with administration of 27% oxygen [3]. The oxygen dose prescribed in severe acute asthma attacks should therefore be variable and based on achieving and maintaining an spO2 of 92% adults and 95% children using pulse oximetry [3].
Bronchodilators (2 agonists) are used for the relief of the symptoms of asthma. Additional Aminophylline ahs also been sued in conjunction with B2 agonists but its role in additional benefit has been unclear. Indeed one review found that in acute asthma the use of Aminophylline did not result in any additional bronchodilation compared to standard care with Beta agonists [4].
Many patients who are admitted to hospital with acute asthma are often prescribed antibiotics incase the cause of the exacerbation is a bacterial infection. However the cost, side effects and allergy risk associated with antibiotics call into question whether they should be prescribed in acute asthma. One systematic review found that there is insufficient evidence to support or refute the use of antibiotics in the case of acute asthma [5]. More research is required in this area to provide evidence on the efficacy of antibiotics in patients with acute asthma.
Corticosteroids are used routinely in the management of acute asthma although the route of administration remains controversial. Oral corticosteroids are easier to administer than IV and are potentially safer than IV corticosteroids although they take longer to reach therapeutic levels. However a research ahs shown that corticosteroids administered orally and IV had similar efficacy in the treatment of adults hospitalised with acute asthma [6].
Patient education plays a vital role in the prevention of exacerbations of asthma. Indeed one systematic review found that educating patients how to self manage their asthma reduced hospital admissions, unscheduled visits to the GP and days off work [7]. A written individualised action plan enable the patient to adjust there medication in response to particular symptoms and signs. Such strategy avoids delays, prevents exacerbations and adds to the patient's sense of control over their asthma [2].
The prevalence of asthma is increasing worldwide with approximately 10% of people having suffered an asthma attack [9]. Exposure to certain stimuli produces inflammation and structural changes in the airways resulting in airway hyper responsiveness and obstruction to airflow. The aim of intervention is to:
minimise or eliminate symptoms
maximise lung function, prevent exacerbations
minimise the need for medication
facilitate self-management of asthma
Many asthmatics do not use their inhalers correctly resulting in only 10% of the medication actually reaching the patients airways. It is therefore vital that a patients inhaler technique is observed to ensure that they are gaining maximum benefit from it and to prevent their asthma treatment being inappropriately stepped up to include steroid use.
Upper respiratory tract infections and exposure to allergens are thought to be the most common triggers of severe asthma exacerbations.