It was in preparing for my Intention &amp; Anticipation presentation on Honda (B) when I first seriously considered Images. Briefly, this image describes strategy as a game played out by actors who have to consider their own actions and those of others.
Prior to this, strategy to me has been primarily about the environment and market (competitors, customers etc.). The market was a flattening device and perfect knowledge was assumed. Strategy was the elixir used by firms to beat the market. It was a step-by-step instruction manual telling us how to achieve our desired destiny by planning and anticipating what others do.
The image explained by Wensley 1 explains that it isn't as simple as that. Sometimes, it is difficult to foresee the plans of others. Grint (1997) describes the fuzziness of logic. The McNamara case 2 and video says that "rationality will not save us". In fact, sometimes, we don't even know what we want our destiny to be!
An implication of this would be to give up on strategy. Why bother trying to control? This appears attractive. It seems that too much thinking and planning may be suboptimal. But isn't strategy all about thinking and planning - being the masters of our own fate? This has been difficult for me to swallow.
Of course, Wensley points out that the Growth-Share Matrix can help managers decide which of the four modes in the M-Matrix to adopt.
But this raises some ethical questions. Would shareholders view a Meandering management kindly? How would the Honda bosses back in Japan have reacted if they found out what was initially happening in the US?
1 In Images of Strategy (pp.105-135) edited by Cummings, S. &amp; Wilson, D.
2 In The Fog of War: Lessons from the life of Robert S. McNamara (pp.61-73) by Blight, J. &amp; Lang, J.
This image was a key moment in my appreciation of Images. It managed to stir-up questions about my past understanding of strategy. Although it was dealing with rather intangible ideas just like other images, I felt that the lessons from this Image were practical and robust enough to challenge the rational view of strategy.
Numbers was the next important moment. After facing the many nebulous ideas over the past weeks, it was a refreshing and re-orienteering experience. It served to remind me what the business of business was - making money.
Reading the Dilbert cartoons in Numbers reminded me of my initial doubts about this course and the idea of strategy being an academic discipline - waffling about great paradigms and models without end and leaving it to someone else to execute. It was difficult not to be cynical.
No doubt other bits of strategy (Term 1 especially and Term 2, to an extent) provide practical details about how to conduct strategy. But it has always felt that it (maximizing profits) was somewhat forgotten. It was always implicitly assumed that profits follow from strategy. But reading the text by Smith 3 and studying the Indo case, it isn't always clear that this is true.
For example, the image of Ethos talks about telos. Suppose an organization's telos is being a 'slacker'. According to this image, it should act out its telos (being lazy). But how does a lazy slacker earn more profits than a hardworking slacker? Or is it its purpose to be eaten up by its competitors? This rather contrived example shows that some Images might be fundamentally un-sound, and a good test would be to identify its attitudes towards profits.
This image thus reminds us that strategy can and should be appreciated through different lenses, but ultimately, strategy has to be driven and backed up by sound ideas. The bottom line of business is not doing good, not being great explorers or being great salesmen. It is just maximizing shareholder value.
3 In Images of Strategy (pp.356-382) edited by Cummings, S. &amp; Wilson, D.
I was also a little surprised to see Smith talk excitedly about EVA/SHV as if they were recently discovered magical formulae for success. It only goes to show how much this principle has been forgotten in strategy.
It was while learning these two images that I did the most contemplating, and felt that I appreciated important philosophical attitudes that had supported my understanding of the rest of the course. My full learning progress is documented in the Appendix.
Prior to this part of the course, my understanding of business was one that was rationalistic. Strategy was a science of maximizing profits. Economics taught me about equilibrium and the benefits of competition. Strategy in Term 1 to me was about breaking the equilibrium and beating the competition. It was a good introduction to the hands-on, vocational methods. It showed me how to study businesses and rationally explain why certain decisions were undertaken and whether it was successful or not.
To me, it was like the Old Testament law which details how we should live our lives and explained that if businesses failed to observe certain 'moral codes', they were doomed and would be punished.
Term 2 was a shock to me. It was an intellectually confusing phase and it shook my beliefs and raised plenty of doubts as I appreciated the post-modern view on strategy. As useful as this revisionist paradigm was in raising up important issues and bringing about new ideas to me, I now have more questions to ask!
The post-modern view applies different lenses to look at and deconstruct strategy. What's the purpose of doing so? Isn't business just about creating value? Being scholars and applying these lenses distracts us from business's true purpose - profit maximization! Why philosophize about a vocation?
Over time, I have learnt the value of 'unlearning' and relearning strategy, as this paradigm requires. Strategy as presented in Term 1 was described as if it was an unambiguous moral code, a recipe-book for success.
Unlearning and deconstructing ideas allows us to question assumptions and to appreciate the complexity of strategy not possible when applying the rationalistic lenses of Term 1. Grint illustrates a few examples of how our understanding and observation of the world is imperfect. With this in mind, what then for 'control', when we can't fully grasp the consequences of our own actions?
Therefore, while allowing for subjectivity and plurality into strategy makes the study more complicated, the postmodern process of analyzing the purpose, structure and application of strategy only serves to make it 'fuller'. Just as the study of jurisprudence helps make better laws, understanding the images of strategy helps make better strategy.
For example, the recurrent debates in Images, such as whether strategy ought to be programmatic or emergent; or whether profits automatically follow from strategy, are as abstract as ever, but there are practical lessons that can be learnt here. No doubt, not having a grasp of these issues doesn't make strategy-making impossible. It would only be less 'holistic' (for want of a better word) and less optimal.
Undoubtedly, Images has been useful and it has added to my knowledge in the many ways described above. Thinking through Images is an interesting, illuminating and reflective yet uncomfortable, nettlesome and intellectually-exhausting activity. I also wonder whether it has distracted me and got me hooked on debates that would probably never be resolved, what more never really matter.
The question that I ask myself should then be: where do I draw the line between being Reflective and Myopic?