By 2001, Brazil should have started to feel the full effect of the Real devaluation in 1999, giving them an increased competitive advantage in the export market coupled with other government policies designed to liberalize trade and encourage investment; It was experiencing some promising growth in the areas of consumption and investment (see Appendix 1) and had reached a degree of stability largely due to the export-led recovery. However, this impact did not fully materialize as the US economy was beginning to show signs of a slowdown.
Brazil, being highly susceptible to external shocks due to its dependence on exports, was even more acutely affected in 2001 by the 9/11 tragedy. To begin looking at how this impacted the national economy and slowed down the GDP growth, one must quickly examine the determinants of GDP. GDP can be measured by either looking at the nation's total output, its total expenditure or its total income. A change in one of these will be reflected in both other values, as the economy reaches equilibrium where output = expenditure = income.
September 11 triggered an economic slowdown in the US that had a spill-over effect on the Brazilian economy. The fear factor and an element of uncertainty about the future led to a considerable fall in consumption, which is the main component of aggregate demand. This was particularly felt by Brazil as the demand for Brazilian exports decreased from the end 2001, curbing some of the much needed revenue from exports, a major contributor to the growth experienced in the previous years in Brazil, as verified below.
This in turn lowers the equilibrium output of the nation (hence lowering the expenditure on these goods and thus the income from employment, which resulted on a downward multiplier effect), thereby slowing down GDP growth (for values look at Appendix 1).
This, coupled with oil price increases had a rather detrimental impact on production costs in Brazil, and finally on prices. This not only made the exports less competitive, but posed the problem of cost-push inflation.
The oil price hikes might not even have been as acutely felt by Brazilians, who were hoping to be self-sufficient with their oil demands by 2005, had it not been for an accident taking place in the Petrobrs platform P-36, a crucial oil source in Brazil. Though Brazil possesses alternative sources of energy (which it is increasingly attempting to rely on), the manufacturing and industrial sectors suffered a supply shortage and necessitated imports, causing a deterioration of Brazil's trade balance Both of these, as is verified in Appendix 2, experienced the largest slowdown and were greatly responsible for the deceleration of the GDP growth.
Simultaneously, a government-imposed energy rationing programme (as a result of a drought that depleted the hydropower reserves) further jeopardized the GDP growth within the industrial sector, which has been the backbone of the strong economic rebound the previous year.
Within the same time frame, the government also announced an increase in the interest rates, possibly as a measure to curb internal consumption and investment, which had been on the rise since the start of the year (presenting the danger of inflation, as increased production costs are frequently passed on to the consumers. This in turn causes workers to demand higher wages, possibly triggering off a wage-price spiral), a recurring nightmare for Brazilians, particularly in light of the hyperinflation period between 1987 and 1997. More likely however, the government saw an opportunity to attract much needed foreign investment and capital inflows, to offset the downward trend in the capital account of the balance of payments (see graph in Appendix 3).
These continuous increases of the interest rate, up to about 19% (the 4 th highest interest rate in the world at the time), were probably one of the large contributors to the significant decrease in consumption and investment in the nation, as one may conclude from the graph below (also see Appendix 4 - The IS Schedule).A slow down of domestic consumption occurs as saving becomes a more attractive alternative at high interest rates and borrowing increasingly difficult. This increased difficulty in borrowing is also mirrored in investment figures; firms are discouraged to borrow at such high costs, thereby constraining investment and slowing down the accelerator process.
Investment decisions are very volatile and highly dependant on future expectation. The coming election of 2002 may have caused some uneasiness in the business sector, further limiting investment (see Appendix 4 - Shifting the IS Schedule). Resulting from this pessimism and possibly predicted future wage increase demands (as a result of inflationary pressures from oil price increases), the unemployment rate rose tremendously in 2001, perhaps proving the original Phillips Curve correct, as high unemployment was unavoidable with the containment of inflation .
2001 was also marked by another event which may have had some probable indirect implications on Brazil's economic performance. The extent of the direct impact of the Argentinean crisis on the Brazilian economy is debatable, but what was evident was that investor confidence in growing South American markets certainly suffered a blow.
The trade balance disequilibrium could have had further detrimental effects for the national economy; as the value of the currency depreciated, external debt became more expensive and thus increasingly difficult to service and repay. Deterioration of the Real, coupled with high interest rates put pressure on the domestic debt burden (which reached 53.7% of GDP in August 2001), especially since an estimated 27.1% was dollar determined. Further fiscal adjustments in the form of tax hikes were necessitated to finance these additional costs, resulting in an increased downward pressure on economic activity.