L'Or The firm entered the Chinese market in 1996, but consolidated its presence with the acquisition of Chinese cosmetics brand 'Yue-Sai' in 2004. The industries in which L'Or An understanding of this external operating environment is of crucial importance to ensure success in foreign markets. The most pressing aspects will be discussed in this study using a PESTLE Analysis, focusing mainly on the aspects L'Or
The political realm needs to be carefully considered when entering China, as business in the country can never be disentangled from politics. Despite past impediments, over the last few years the government has displayed a predisposition to change, and create an increasingly open economy. Nonetheless, it remains a communist regime, with the power to change regulations and restrictions without the need of consent from a democratic parliament. Furthermore, China's current leader, Hu Jintao, proved to be more authoritarian than was initially expected by the global market, often hampering reform and muffling the press.
This unease present in the business environment was somewhat lessened with China's WTO entry in 2001, by restricting some of the business risk through the WTO's membership requirements Amongst some of the measures are the reduction of import tariffs and other non-tariff barriers, as well as many others, which will help investment to take place in a more attractive, transparent and predictable business environment. It will also serve to accelerate China's own process of economic reform, hence further benefiting entering firms.
Fears have been recently intensified by the upcoming annual plenary session of the National People's Congress. This year's party line has been announced to be inward-looking and conservative
The economic outlook for China and for the cosmetic industry is very favourable. China has displayed impressive GDP growth
The government has shown an important awareness of the need to 'manage' economic growth, in order to make it sustainable and to avoid the dangers of inflation - a common trap for nations who experience heavy growth in a short period of time. The government raised interest rates in October 2004 (the first increase since 1995), and unpegged the renminbi from the dollar in July 2005. However, one currency risk that the firm may experience is that of the artificially low value of the renminbi, despite foreign pressure for revaluation, meaning some 'real' value loss during currency conversion.
Lastly, production costs, like labour and infrastructure are also significantly lower in China, making the establishment of production plants in the country economically appealing, while at the same time offering proximity to the growing Asian market.
Some of the most important considerations for L'Or L'Or It has already signed local star Zhang Ziyi, in order to encourage some identification on the part of the consumers. These adaptations should be discernible within the marketing mix, which will need revising to consider local preferences of distribution, branding and promotion. A recent example in China is the renaming of the Vichy line to 'Dr Vichy', to justify the premium pricing. This 'cultural' knowledge however, is not static in nature, a problem to which L'Or This centre will encourage continuous improvement and monitoring of cultural developments. One of the first findings was that of the strong association of beauty with paleness, as it 'marks' out upmarket consumers from the country's sun burnt peasants. The market for face makeup embodies 62.6% of the entire makeup market value in China
Another recent development at L'Or This trend is deeply present in today's western culture, being witnessed in celebrities, TV shows and men's magazines - and signs of its diffusion into China's 'westernized trendsetters' segment have already emerged. This could possibly represent an opportunity for L'Or
The Chinese technological know-how is developing at an impressive rate, due to both heavy government and private investment. The government has bet on a strong higher education system, creating sought-after graduates, particularly by foreign firms entering the Chinese market. Not only do these candidates possess the technical skills needs, but also a deep understanding of local culture.
As for the private sector, L'Or This is very important for L'Or The cosmetic industry is a technology-heavy one, where research and improvement is of the essence to ensure an ongoing flow of new products and concepts, and in order to maintain an 'edge'.
The legal sphere L'Or Despite economic openness, the party maintains an iron grip in the running of the country and often dictates the law in an arbitrary manner. L'Or
One possible threat to sales for L'Or This problem has already been identified by L'Or
L'Or By adding 'Yue-Sai' to the current portfolio
Although limited attention is currently paid to the environment in China, as the country becomes further integrated into the global stage, it will certainly experience mounting pressure to adhere to developed world 'standards'. Pollution restrictions and animal testing bans are yet to be seen, but should soon be emerging as pressure groups recognize the need for these in China. L'Or
L'Or These changing consumers preferences have been observed in many markets, and some firms have already seized the opportunity to close this gap (for example, L'Or Although this in not yet the case in China, western tendencies rate high for L'Or
Despite the many strengths of the PESTLE model, like its applicability, adaptability and ease of use, and the help it can provide in matching the organization's activities to its environment, it lacks the mention of some significant factors.
The framework loses some relevance in specific cases, by failing to identify or not giving enough emphasis to the most pressing factors. In the case of L'Or Furthermore, the model examines only external factors, whereas important internal factors like size, structure, resources and experience may need to be considered, as firms can fail in apparently perfect external conditions.
The model also fails to discuss the competitive environment in which firms operate, a crucial part in defining firm strategy. The cosmetics industry in China is relatively consolidated, with the top 3 brands holding 46.1% of the market Competitive action is also not addressed, and may result in inaccurate expectation and forecasts for firms. Avon Products, the world's largest direct seller of cosmetics, has recently received China's first licence for direct selling after the government lifted a ban on the practice, albeit under strict rules.
Many also point out that this is a static model, and given that the factors under discussion are constantly changing, unless firm recognize the need for constant revision it can become quickly obsolete. Lastly, the model does not acknowledge the relative importance of different factors, thus possibly making more difficult the recognition of the most pressing issues and the development of a suitable strategy.
Many of these weaknesses may be overcome by the combination of other frameworks/models, like the SWOT analysis (to consider internal strengths and weaknesses) or Porter's five forces (to consider the competitive environment), making it a more robust system of strategy design and analysis.