Lord Denning, renowned idol of the judicial system is known for his bold creativity and unashamed disrespect for precedent. Denning chooses to "deal on principle" I shall examine his efforts on establishing wives equity in the home, rights for deserted wives, and proprietary estoppel, critically analysing his justification and intuitive approaches: was he right, why was such radical judicial activity necessary and were his 'achievements' really progress?
Denning's most memorable contribution was his gift to women: the 'deserted wife's equity,' an example of the fabled judicial law creation that Denning is so fondly renowned. When Denning was appointed, law was undergoing radical reform concerning gender equality and women's rights. Aged patriarchal values of male superiority were staging their last strive for survival, whilst law reform was typically unhurried. Women had restricted proprietary rights and the majority of title papers were in the husband's name. "Under the old common law as it existed until 70 years ago she had no rights at all apart from those of her husband. She was treated by the law more like a piece of furniture than anything else." When a husband deserted his wife, she had no legal right to remain in the home, Denning commenting: "I could see an injustice, it cried out for a remedy." His first reform opportunity was in H v H In an act of pure judicial creativity, Denning "did not cite a single case" and "dealt with it on principle," Whilst the decision grasped the just principle it stood alone, unprecedented and heavily reliant on S17 entitling judges to "make such an order with respect to property in dispute as he thinks fit." Denning proclaimed it afforded "a free hand to do what is just." The wife was saved.
The decision was not without legal footing: inspiration for S17's ingenious use stemmed from Goddard LJ in 1942. Shipman v Shipman Denning questioned why the position should change if the man wronged and deserted, suggesting "it is the husbands duty to provide the woman with a roof over her head; and by providing the matrimonial home, he gives her an authority to be there" which is irrevocable. His beliefs are morally grounded, pragmatic and just, providing order in a changing society with increasing separation. Bendall v McWhirter This was a fictitious creation. Furthermore, Bendall exaggerates protection, the right becoming binding on successors in title; in this instance the trustee of the husbands bankruptcy, Denning deciding that "of all the creditors, she has the most crying claim of all." Women were therefore justly protected from eviction by mistresses, trustees, or husband/purchaser collaborations.
The Lords in National Provincial v Hastings Denning crossed the line from judge to law maker, stating that despite absence of legal or equitable interests wives have a "licence coupled with equity," Purists and colleagues objected, the LQR Judicial freedom is necessary to achieve justice, e.g. literal interpretation is notoriously unjust, yet for law to be a certain, democratic machine judges cannot be allowed free reign. The value was acknowledged, not the justification. Indeed, Formalistic theories (e.g. Dworkin) stress the importance of judicial segregation to create a cohesive, democratic system.
Yet Denning actions were true hallmarks of justice; it was ingenious, providing practical solutions decided "on principle." It was elastic, and like his other creations it was expanded until restrained by the ever conscious Lords. Finally it afforded women the dignity and respect they deserved, illustrating the inadequacy and gender inequality of legislative provisions. Perhaps Denning was justified, a Royal Commission Denning himself believes that it may have taken "40 years" From Feminist perspectives the decision has immense value, acknowledging the male paradigm and deconstructing the patriarchy that subordinates women in the home. In a liberal society, where public and private spheres of life are divided, existing proprietary rights excluded women, assisting their suppression. Why should women surrender their rights, acknowledging male superiority? Denning assured law did not fail women. The ethos continued: Lady Summerskill introduced a Bill in 1964 reinstating provisions, becoming the Matrimonial Homes Act Denning was principally correct, providing temporary justice, provoking creation of suitable legislation.
Denning made judgements concerning proprietary estoppel; where an estate owner expressly or impliedly creates informal assurances concerning existing or future land rights, and then attempts an unconscientious withdrawal from the representation which another has relied to their detriment. Inwards v Baker Denning applies estoppel as it is the only plausible solution: the law disfavours informal creation of rights (no deed/registration), gratuitous promises are unenforceable (not contractual), voluntarily rendered services are not compensational and consensual occupation is not adverse possession. Denning imposed equity: it is "a licence coupled with equity" This was just, and was expressly affirmed by the Privy Council. It was a pragmatic solution to a commonplace problem: families rarely create formal agreements; illustrating Denning as grounded and understanding: not the stereotypical judge.
The issues were whether equity was transferable to third parties. Law appeared to limit equity as a personal interest, yet today equity is generally freely transmissible to third parties. Denning was ahead of his time, clearly supporting this transition in Ives Investment v High, Today increasing support exists, perhaps Denning was right.
A related development concerned contractual licences and the creation of equities. Traditional doctrine holds that contractual licences confer no proprietary interests upon the licensee, thus even with actual occupation or receivership of rents and profits the contractual licence never forms an overriding interest under S70(1)(g) LPA This reflects orthodox views that contracts are personal. Denning created controversy, suggesting that licences coupled with equity could affect third parties, almost akin to a proprietary right, overriding the privity of contract principle. He was the "foremost protagonist of the theory," Denning without authority, maintained that in registered land a contractual licence coupled with actual occupation constituted an overriding interest; reiterating his own comments expressed in Errington v Errington Known as the Denning doctrine it was contentious because of the power it afforded the court: contractual licences could be protected against most other rights. Denning believed that equity could protect the licensee from wrongful revocation. It was applied in Binnons v Evans Denning explored the possibilities. There was no tenancy at will as she could not determine the agreement, and was inconsistent with the requirements. It was not a life tenancy as she had no power of sale, and was contrary to the intentions of the parties, and it was no other form of tenancy as there was no term of years in absolute, required by Lace v Chantler.
Denning believed that it should be an equitable interest: under Foster v Robinson The court gave the contract an equitable construction, imposing a constructive trust. Realistically the contractual licence became binding upon the third party where they have full notice of it. It was the just result for the case, but as a principle it attracted wide criticism. National Provincial v Hastings Denning was fortunately correct, perhaps justified, but today I question whether society would tolerate such undemocratic law creation. Such behaviour is potentially perilous, disrespecting the impartiality and autonomy of law establishment. Denning synthesised law, but it achieved justice despite being denounced. It was the only way to achieve the right result, so despite subsequent overruling it served its purpose: Denning's bold move out of line was entirely worthwhile.
Denning contributed immensely to the development of women's rights in the home, akin to his work for the 'deserted wife's equity.' Where issues continued for deserted wives, normal women were gaining a right in the home despite registration in the husbands' name, with Denning at the forefront. The first achievement was establishing a share in the proceeds of sale for the wife, Denning protesting against his fellows in Hoddinott v Hoddinott Denning effectively overruled this, disregarding the doctrine of precedent, and stating that "beneficial interests in the matrimonial, or furniture, belongs to one or the other absolutely, or it is clear that they intended to hold it in definite shares. The court will give effect to these intentions;" striking an accommodating approach. In Rimmer v Rimmer
Subsequent progression established women a share in the house, however precedent was restricting: "The wife had right to the house or any share in it unless she could show a contract by the husband with her or a gift by him to her or a trust by him for her in regard to it." Denning disregarded this stating, "I do think that line of argument is valid today...in many cases...the intention of the parties is not clear... the court has to attribute an intention to them," Denning's approach is refreshingly realistic for the period, suggesting that when living together "it does not matter who does the saving or the spending or payments:" you intend to "live together for the rest of your lives." His application ensured justice in a good many cases, e.g. Rimmer v Rimmer He stated "... I prefer to take the simple test: What is reasonable and fair in the circumstances as they have developed, seeing that they are circumstances which no one contemplated before?" This is Denning in his element, deciding the just result, then grappling for tool to implement it: creative but mischievous. S17 affords complete discretion, ideal justification where law fails to provide adequate provisions. At this period there was radical social adjustment, women's rights markedly enlarged but law reacted lethargically, still supporting old patriarchal values: the social segregation and suppression of women. Denning was their hope, and whilst he abused his power, the greater good was worthwhile. Yet Denning moved too far, perhaps deliberately. The test was too broad and on appeal in the Lords, whilst agreeing that "the principle he sought to establish was fair in all circumstances that it had happened" Yet Denning and the Appeal court continued to use it, such as in Pettitt v Pettitt
Consequently, the Lords introduced the trust concept, Lord Diplock stating "resulting, implied or constructive trusts" could exist in Gissing on appeal. A fortnight later, Denning applied this in Falconer v Falconer, Denning was right. Like the deserted wife's equity the thrusts his principles intentionally, provokingly: eventually law must retaliate and find suitable legislative provisions.
One inequality remained: where non-financial contributions were made. As Denning put it, why does the wife who stays at home and works for family's good not acquire a share, when the wife who goes out to work does? If Denning's broad principle had been accepted, law could easily have developed, but the Lords "slammed the door." If "she gives up paid work to devote herself to caring for her husband and child...she finds herself with nothing she can call her own." Denning remedied injustice: the 'new model' constructive trust, implemented in Falconer This built on Gissing, It was a pragmatic reflection of life when women were still domestically based. Burns disapproved, stating "no such general power exists." It was replaced by parliamentary provision, partially embodying his principle: S37 MPPA 1970.
With seemingly careless disregard for precedent and legal doctrine, Denning supported the underdog. Consistently stretching law until provoking parliamentary response (e.g. deserted wife's equity), and the necessary legal reform. He was inventive (e.g. S17) and innovative, not conforming to stereotypical images of dry and conservative judges. His gifts to women, at a time when society's very structure resisted their fight for equality made him a model of morality, promoting equality and annihilating law's male paradigm. It may have been 40 years until similar provisions were made. We cannot ignore his boisterous, dangerous disregard for authority, leaving successive courts questioning the right principle to embody. Today such unconstitutional behaviour would not be tolerated, what was once named "a naked usurpation of legislative function under the thin guise of interpretation." But the law is no longer what it was: an obsolete, inflexible machine adhering to an aged morality. Consistently he found the natural and 'right' conclusion, perhaps the result the person in a street would state on hearing the facts. Despite tireless devotion, the Lords defeated him, but eventually they introduced measures effectively similar to his. He was no dictator; he loathed dictatorships, only abusing power out of necessity. "The silent revolution has been accomplished."