The HFE The creation of new, external reproductive techniques that utilised genetics and once inseparable human constituents as reproductive components, created "a new generation of acute and subtle dilemmas". Fifteen years later, medicine has developed "exponentially"; I shall examine, in light of the
Legal responses can be categorized as either "pro-regulation" UK), which controls, confines and operates within a highly structured scheme; or "anti-regulation" US), which operates "ex post, endeavoring to compensate and adjust" Law should provide "legitimacy", However, this legitimacy can "often owe more to Since this is a diverse rather than homogenous entity, consensus on a moral, let alone legal level is improbable. Law must either convey an ideological, predictable and determinate approach or react with "pragmatism", These considerations affect law's response to the two fundamental, "competing (and often conflicting) interests":
Warnock recommended an independent and "comprehensive scheme of regulation" The HFE limits reproductive technologies and research involving embryos, placing them in "strictly defined ethical and legal backgrounds". It bestows significant powers to a regulatory authority, the HFEA, Licenses permit clinics to provide subscribed treatment services (e.g. IVF), or to store or research on embryos/gametes. Under Schedule Two S3(1), the HFEA can grant licences only where "research is necessary or desirable",
Legal intervention from a fixed perspective "distorts" Regulation therefore needs to "incorporate a degree of flexibility or open-endedness", Whilst the HFE provides a fixed position, perhaps reflecting some core, minimum ethical standards rather than adopting an ideological perspective; the HFEA is more adaptive; and combined with the courts is prepared to purposively interpret provisions, asserting to provide a "high degree of public accountability in the development and delivery of new treatments and research". No single regulatory framework for genetics exists, whilst the HFE has no "single, coherent philosophical underpin".
CNR, CNR was not envisaged under the HFE, which expressly prohibited 'cell substitution' cloning. This imprecise, "purposive" Realistically, CNR was not "specifically" The HFE defines embryos as where "fertilisation is complete", The Donaldson Report CNR was not prohibited, but licensable; a It is this sense of 'make do and mend' that characterises recent regulatory development. Fortunately, the HRC It serves as a presiding example of law introducing "control mechanisms only after scientific excess";
The forced interpretation used in The The HFEA permitted this, stating that where "PGD is already undertaken...the use of tissue typing to save the life of a sibling can be justified", CORE
However, Kay's In an attempt to justify/secure PGD, the court considered whether under the "restrictive" Kay asserted that under Schedule-Two However, the Court of Appeal's judgement overcame these difficulties by using "an approach to statutory interpretation that was not just purposive but creative". Consequently, the court Clearly considerable uncertainty exists whether it is licensable; an extremely undesirable position.
The Court of Appeal's responses to the HFEA's arguments for HLA were "less than satisfactory". In agreement, Schiemann This "misses the point": Fortunately, Mance Otherwise, where PGD had been permitted to prevent genetic anomalies, clinics would be able to screen cells for other characteristics, "including sex",
The HFEA argued HLA CORE challenged this, stating treatments should only available if necessary to "assist women [to] carry children"; Lord Phillips Subsequently, Phillips claims the only difference between PGD and HLA was "the desired characteristics"
Mance's justification of HLA was inventive: This was "plucked out of thin air", This use of S13(5) Furthermore, as the HFEA did not regard PGD/HLA to be similar; the judgement "disregard[s] the fundamentally different purpose" of each test; advancing unjustifiable generalisations that destroy the precision and integrity of the regulatory regime. The genus argument, whilst supported with evidence (Hansard, Ministerial Advice), promotes a vague and speculative stance that moves beyond the normal parameters of judicial creativity; and is at risk of becoming a warrant for judges to promote their own moral standpoints. It is a licence to extend law on an ad hoc, and 'as needed' basis that may lead to a slippery slope; particularly as it has been undemocratically developed by those with little expertise, who clearly have very different ideas on why or how HLA should be justified, and even if it is possible under existing regulation.
The consequences of Effectively, where PGD is used, the HFEA can authorise the "selection of embryos for blue eyes, blonde hair or desired sex, without reference to Parliament". Brownsword suggests that when Phillips justifies HLA and PGD as methods to ensure embryos are "suitable for the purpose of being placed within [women]"  It is at risk from "undue influence," In chorus, the STC's
This In The HFEA distinguished Realistically, only the latter argument distinguishes Whittaker from Hashmi: if the potentially dangerous PGD procedure is used to prevent a child from being born with a serious illness, the "benefits outweigh the risks",
Whilst Kantian theory suggests we should never treat people as 'means,' but surely this only applies if we treat people "solely or merely as means". There are worse reasons to create a child than to save another. Whilst positively selecting characteristics is a dangerous and now
A comprehensive review of the parameters, and how we regulate fertility is required; a review that must remain ongoing. It is "illogical" There is "no control over the...bulk of...reproductive practice". "IVF is no more dangerous than other techniques", Regulating such a large area of reproductive medicine would be "very expensive"; This is not a problem that will vaporise. As medicine develops new challenges confront us. Society is also changing; and in the advent of Human Rights and liberalisation, we must face new issues, e.g. assisted homosexual conceptions. The HFE does not focus enough on "improving clinical standards". Fertility is a global industry regulated in different ways and degrees. The We must further our co-operation, and produce an extended legal regime that is reviewed regularly; a product of proper democratic debate that operates comfortably within safe and respected boundaries. Existing regulation, limited to specific applications and supplemented "on an ad hoc basis"
N.B.
As this Assignment was written two important developments were pending:
Hashmi decision is awaiting review by the House of Lords
The Commons Science and Technology Committee Report on Reproductive Technologies was published on March 24