In this assignment, researches have been done on the types of engines that are usually used for racing. The four types of racing engines that was of interest were the Formula, Rally, Sports and Motorcycle racing engines. The specifications of these engines have been summarized in Appendix A and B so that one can compare their important parameters. Appendix A shows all the racing engines, of which their individual performance will be discuss in the content of this report. Appendix B is a table which accumulates all the information obtained about the four racing engine requirement and their overall comparisons are also included in the main text. In this report, we also accessed past and future developments of each of these racing engines.
In 1894, the idea of car racing was raised once a series of petrol-fuelled cars were constructed. The first official race was held in Chicago, Illinois on 2nd November in 1895 and racing engines were improved exponentially during the 20
Researches on different engines which usually used in racing were performed and discussed in this report. Engine used for general automotives was internal combustion (I.C.) engine in which the mechanical power of vehicle was produced by combustion of fuel within the combustion chamber. Internal combustion engine could have either two-strokes or four-strokes and either spark ignites or compression ignites. Gasoline, diesel and natural gas could be selected as the fuel in a SI engine.
On the other hand, two major types of IC engines were identified: Rotary engine and Reciprocating engine. The major representative of rotary engines in automotive industry was the Wankel engine (Fig 2) which was the most highly developed rotary engine since 1970s; such engine was used due to the compactness and high power performance.
However, the development of Wankel engine was suspended in most of the companies due to the arising environmental regulations as well as the effect of the oil crisis. The most recent car operated by Wankel engine was the Mazda RX-7 which produced in 1999.
In automotive racing industry, only particular specifications were selected and employed since the efficiency could only be improved by such specifications. Different cylinder configurations such as single, in-line, v-type, w-type, u-type, opposed cylinder, opposed piston and radial could be found in IC engines. However, in-line and v-type were the most commonly used configurations in automotive racing engines. Further more, the common numbers of valves employed in each cylinder were 2 (1 intake, 1 exhaust), 4 (2 intake, 2 exhaust) and 5 (3 intake, 2 exhaust). Generally 4 valves were employed in racing engine.
. Compare to normal engines, limits such as peak operating cylinder pressure were pushed up in some racing engines so that a higher performance could be obtained. Besides, the horsepower and fuel economy could be increased by maximizing the cylinder pressure. Although the cylinder pressure could be increased by increasing the compression ratio, alternative technique could also be used since cylinder pressures could be altered significantly by using camshaft selection, carburetion, nitrous and supercharging. Compression pressures could be adjusted drastically by installing supercharging, turbo-charging or intercooling system. However, apart from installing extra equipment to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of racing engines, the durability and lifetime were also a significant factor to consider since racing cars might require to operation for a long time without any failures
In the report, a series of engines used in different automotive racings including formula racing, rally racing, sports racing (including endurance) and motorcycle racing were presented. In fact, the features required in racing engine were totally depended on types of racing and performances of different racing engine were adjusted in order to meet the specific purpose and provide a best fit performance. However, high acceleration, high maximum speed, high power, high torque, light weight and high efficiency of engine cycles were generally the ideal for racing engines. For instance, high power output was necessary for rally engine since such racing might consist of climbing uphill or operating under poor conditions. To conclude, particular engine performance could be adjusted in accordance with racing course conditions and requirements.
Additional features could be employed in different racing engines so that the performance could be improved further. Forced induction systems such as turbocharger and supercharger were explained as well as cooling systems and carburetor.
1. Turbocharger - An apparatus to boost the horsepower of engine without significantly increased its weight, operated by pressurizing the air flowing into the engine's cylinders in order to get more fuel to be burnt during each stroke. Advantage of compressing the air was more air could be squeezed into a cylinder, hence more fuel could be added and more power could be obtained from each explosion in each cylinder. More overall power could be produced than the same engine without the charging (Figure 7).
Supercharger (Figure 8a) - The mechanism was nearly identical to the turbocharger, the major difference was the power supplies in order to run the air compressor. In supercharger, a belt was connected directly to the engine and power was transmitted via the belt. For turbocharger, power was obtained from exhaust stream since the exhaust run through a turbine which in turn the compressor was span. A graph was shown the variation of power with rpm with and without supercharger (Figure 8b).
3. Cooling systems - Either liquid-cooled or air-cooled technique was generally employed in racing engines.
i) Liquid-cooling: Fluid flowed through pipes and ducts within the engine, heat was absorbed by the fluid and engine was cooled as the liquid passed through. The fluid was then passed through a heat exchanger or radiator and heat was transferred from the fluid to the air blowing through the exchanger.
ii) Air-cooling: An old-fashioned cooling technique, engine block was covered in aluminum fins rather than circulating fluid through the engine so that heat could be conducted away from the cylinder. A powerful fan was used to force air over these fins and the engine was cooled by transferring the heat to air.
4. Carburetor - The right amount of gasoline with air could be mixed so that the engine could run properly.
In an internal combustion engine with multiple (more than one) cylinders, the cylinders and piston could have V-, in-line, horizontal, w type, opposed piston and radial configuration. The most common configurations used in racing engines are the V- and in-line configurations.
Sports racings consisted of a variety of competitions between modified cars and were normally taken place on a specific racing course. Due to the enormous area sports racings have covered, only endurance racing was mentioned in this report.
Rally engines were required to operate effectively even under poor conditions such as in swamps (water resistance), dirt and on snowy surfaces. The engine also needed to generate sufficient power in order to drive the rally car uphill. Two rally engines were shown below:
Formula racings involve a variety of high speed and high performance cars competing against each other. At present, the most famous Formula race is Formula-1 (F1) racing. In this assignment, most research was done on Formula-1 engines. Formula-1 car engines have excellent performance as they are about ten times more powerful than normal car engines. To ensure all races are reasonably fair, FIA (F For instance, the engine must be four strokes and consist of 10 circular cylinders with less than 5 valves on each cylinder. Supercharging is not allowed in Formula-1 cars. At present, the 10 cylinders of the engines are usually arranged in V configuration. They often have capacities of about 3000 cc capacity and can generate more than 800 bhp. High torque of the engines means high power output (i.e. high horsepower) as the number of engine cycles per unit time is depend on the torque.
Special materials (such as Aluminium alloys, ceramic etc.) were used to manufacture the engine's components for Formula-1 for weight reduction purpose and also to reduce the chances of overheating of the engines. The cooling of the engines was very important in Formula racing cars especially in Endurance racing since the car was required to run for a long period of time (typically 6 hours, 12 hours and 24 hours) over the runway course in order to test the engine's durability. Formula-1 car engines are all air cooled. Less dense ceramic was used in making the internal components of the engines so that it was easier to accelerate and also reduce the engine's fuel consumption. The overall size of the engines should be reasonable light and small, so that they could be easily fitted into the chassis.
The numerical data for the engines' torques and compression ratios (CR) are not available in all of the sources. This may because these data have to remain confidential. Following are some examples Formula-1 racing engines:
Motorcycle racing is a variety of sports involving motorcycles competing with each other. Some common examples of motorcycle racings are Isle of Man TT (road racing), MotoGP (circuit racing), Daytona (endurance racing) etc. Engines of motorcycles are gasoline engines and can be either two strokes or four strokes.
They either use fuel injection or carburetors to feed the fuel-air mixture into the combustion chamber. Motorcycles used for racing are mostly four-stroke engines with multiple cylinders. The power of an engine depends on the number and sizes of its cylinders. Therefore, increasing the sizes and number of cylinders in an engine would increase its power, i.e. increase the engine's displacement.
Motorcycles engines at present can have single-cylinder, two-cylinder, four-cylinder or six-cylinder and their displacements ranges from 250 cc to over 1500 cc. Most motorcycles nowadays often have two or four-cylinder engines. Engines with high displacement have higher fuel consumption and therefore generate more power. A multiple cylinder engine can have its cylinders arranged in horizontal, inline or V configurations. As mentioned beforehand, the main problems with V configuration engines were its vibrations and high centre of mass. Among the three configurations, the horizontal configuration has the best weight distribution (lower centre of gravity) and also produced the least vibrations. The following is an example of a racing motorcycle:
The performances for each racing engine were plotted in Appendix A and the comparisons of performance for different types of racing engines were plotted in Appendix B.
Firstly, all the displacements of formula and rally racing were very closed to 3000cc and 2000cc respectively, however the maximum possible values for those racing vehicle should be larger since those performances were achieved under some racing regulations. On the other hand, the torque and compression ratio of formula racing engines as well as the compression ratio of rally racing engines were missing on the table due to those performance might be confidential to public. In formula racing V10 engine were normally used since the racing engine could only consist 10 cylinders in accordance with formula racing regulation. Most of the rally engines were employing inline configuration except for Subaru Impreza since a more efficient flat configuration was used.
Further more, the combined table in Appendix represented the requirement of different racing engines. Ten cylinders were used in formula racing engine since the vehicle required an extremely high speed. Besides, the displacement of sports racing engine was enormous compared to the others, due to the corresponding vehicle (Ford GT) was an endurance racing vehicle, hence an extremely high value of displacement was reasonable. Conversely, the total weight of motorcycle was pretty light, therefore the fuel consumption and displacement required were not necessary to be high. The power of formula engine was the highest as the formula car needed to achieve a highest possible acceleration. On the other hand, the motorcycle power was the lowest as the weight of the vehicle was small; hence only low force and power were needed in order to drive the vehicle.
Although the torque of formula engine was not available, the expected torque of formula engine should be greater than the Ford GT (500lb-ft).
Firstly, Wankel engines obtained a high power performance and were familiar in automotive industry during 1990s. However, the development was suspended due to the arising environmental regulations and the effect of the oil crisis although the future development of this type of engine was enormous.
In conclusion, the performances of different racing engines were totally depended on the type of race. For instance endurance vehicle would require a high displacement whereas a motorcycle would not since endurance race needed a larger capacity of fuel. Besides, the performance could be improved by inserting extra components such as turbocharger and cooler, by modifying/replacing the current components or by either employing specific valve configuration in order to lower the centre of gravity of the vehicle.
Light weight and high strength material such as aluminium alloy could also be used so that a lighter but stiffer product could be achieved.
The future development of these racing engines would be tends to increase the horsepower by developing new systems to assist the current operations. Improvements of racing engine could also be achieved by developing individual components such as piston, crankshaft, camshaft, head cover...etc.