The Commission: the "powerhouse" How can this political/administrative "hybrid" EU institutions, apparently sui generis are transitional, never existing in a state of situ. They share power and cannot independently function without each other; each fighting to remain central to decision-making. The suggestion that the Commission's extensive competence is equivalent to a European government can be explored on many levels, from function and form, inter-institutional relationships, Commission presidency, to theories of European governance, Supernationalism or Intergovernmentalism. Does the Commission work for MS's, or is it an autonomous legal power with agenda-setting capacity? Why is such comparison necessary? Perhaps it underlines a larger crisis to which this discussion must be contextualised: a crisis of governance, legitimacy and identity, something that may be linked to the Commission's White paper on Governance.
It is imperative to have a clear definition of government; does for example, difference exist between governance and leadership? Governance "means different things to different people." Therefore it is productive to assume an essentialist perspective of governance in European states: the "exercise of authority over a state or organisation, a system of ruling [or] political administration." It is usually formed from an elected group, legitimised with a democratic mandate, providing authority for leadership and decision-making over administrative, budgetary, military, social, fiscal and legal fields. Structurally, an "executive power enjoyed by a cabinet and prime minister" "The executive governs...it comprises of...ministers and civil servants - who control...the state's instruments of coercion, wealth and information," Members are responsible for policy areas, directing a relevant department, usually part of an administration or civil service that realises policy. Governments are independent and autonomous with "power to form contractual relations," Many European MS's have bicameral systems, where a second chamber (e.g. a senate) enforces accountability; indeed, democratic legitimisation and control of leadership appear as fundamental as its characteristic authority.
This discussions very existence illustrates the Commission's significance. I see two approaches: a presentation of for and against passages; or a commentary analysing arguments for each attribute compared to government. I have chosen the latter. The ECSC Following the Rome Treaty, and after the first General Report An "institutional balance" The Commission had three levels: the College of Commissioners chosen by MSs; Primary functions are the right of initiative; mediation; budgetary control; legislative/treaty supervision; and external representation.
A starting place for analysis may be the Commission's right to initiate legislation, an undeniable governmental characteristic attributing competence to execute policy. Article 155EC states: to "ensure proper functioning and development of the common-market" This discretion illustrates it may be more than a bureaucracy acting for MS's; it has a degree of autonomy. Article 189a Whilst the Council (Article 208TEC) and EP The Commission must also produce recommendations, opinions, advice and proposals to the CoM Once legislation is formally timetabled, it retains a "considerable measure of control:" This is strengthened by article 189aEC: unanimity shall be required for the Council to amend Commission proposals, whereas the Commission can (providing the Council has not acted) alter or even withdraw proposals. This broad competence is not the stay of an administrator, but the will and power of an independent body representing European interests: the "conscience" Presuming otherwise ignores its "inherently political character." Treaties cannot predetermine every eventuality; consequently the Commission possesses delegated rule-making competence, placing it in "a similar position [to] national executives," Indeed, 4000 "Opportunity exists to make not just administrative law, but what verges on policy," EU trade; illustrating a degree of self-determination and broad competence with "undeniable political implications."
However these arguments must be contextualised. The right of initiative gives a central position, yet it is just that: central, but not at the beginning or end of decision-making processes. Despite discretionary powers; it merely works to a pre-defined programme. MS's determine treaties, the Commission draws policy from them: the agenda is preset. It "is not the formal and final EU decision-maker on major issues - the European Council, CoM EU institutions are designed so that they cannot effectively function independently. The Commission's legislative proposals can only be realised following EP or Council agreement. The EP, originally limited to non-binding opinions, now has a power of co-decision, Whilst the EP could appear as a second chamber in a potentially bicameral system, I would suggest its position and power are (with the Council) more central; it has a form of democratic mandate. The CoM It is characteristic of system where institutions share power and importance, implying decision-making is a mediating process quite unlike conventional governance. This is essential to embody the broad interests presented by institutions representing different quarters, such as national MS's (Council); the electorate, political and interest groups (EP); or community ambitions (Commission). This exploration lies within deeper issues that can only be brushed upon: democratic legitimacy, defining Europe, and contentions between MS/EU politics. How can EU law be justified when synthesised by a single, undemocratic body so egotistical in its aspired power and esteem? The very essence of EU decision-making is mediation "between diverging nations' positions...looking for a consensus." The Commission is perfect for such a position: independent with right to initiate and amend. It is a "broker of interests," It has discretion and a degree of "policy control,"
Responsibility exists for a variety of enforcement and supervisory powers in budgetary and legal fields, administered by the Commission bureaucracy and comparable to government derived enforcement agencies. It supervises legislative enforcement; protects treaties; and even has limited direct implementation of competition policy, governing cross-broader mergers. It functions as a watchdog, perhaps similar to agencies like Customs. It is not "monolithic," Although issuing 1000 formal notices annually, "it lacks the resources to detect and fight all breaches." Its relatively small size (21,000 workers - comparable to a city council
It supervises the budget, overseeing income collection. Whilst characteristic of government, control is much "weaker:" Practically, collection occurs through national agencies who "execute 80% of the budget," Independent financial control is typical of governance; the Commission lacks this element of autonomy. Whilst it is an external representative (e.g. WTO
Structurally the Commission is organised "much like domestic governments." At the "apex" Each commissioner performs roles like cabinet ministers, responsible for portfolios governing policy areas, e.g. trade. Collective responsibility exists like government: when majority decisions are made, all "must toe the line." Commissioners' cabinets imitate the French government system. Commissioners should completely independent, Realistically Commissioners are compromised, expected to be partisan actors to their own MS's. The Commission bureaucracy is divided into twelve DG's. The equivalent of government ministries, they develop policy, organise legislation, allocate revenue, support the executive and observe legislative compliance. Each is responsible for policy initiation in specific regions, "aligned with the competences of the Commissioner." It is equivalent to a government civil service The Commission has also spawned a network of "quasi-autonomous agencies" Its use of executive instruments is a common feature of government, e.g. the French 'ordonnances' or German 'rechtsverordnungen." Whilst organisation appears directly parallel, it is a noteworthy but weak form of assessment. Examining its functionality is more useful. In terms of initiating legislation the Commission operates like government, with specialist departments drafting in relevant DGs. Proposals are then passed through the Chefs de Cabinets, may be revised, and then forwarded to the College who can do as they please with suggestions.
Despite similarities, Commissioners appear as "more than permanent secretaries but less than ministers" Whilst spokesperson for their policy, they are not part of the CoM where decisions are made with the EP. Subsequently, the direct representation and open accountability so characteristic of government is inexistent. The customary individual responsibility, present in all governments is "difficult to apply to the Commission." Democratically, and as the Commission's White paper If original treaty provisions are considered, accountability becomes less vital: decisions are taken, and should be taken at a higher level through the more democratic, transparent Council and EP. Despite the SG Hence decision-making lacks the co-ordinated and inclusive approach of an autonomous government following an objective or ideology, it is more similar to a bureaucracy/administration realising a pre-determined programme of development. "Independence from national control is undermined by the power of cabinets," It signifies a "reluctance of MS's to ensure that the Commission is truly independent and well resourced," Resultantly, the Commission is more intergovernmental, rather than the supranational functionality a true government would adopt. The Comitology system, established by Council decision, It characterises the power struggle between institutions, and limitations placed upon Commission development to prevent it becoming over-centralised, by increasing decision-making involvement. It is not envisaged to be the sole decision-maker. Indeed, it provides a "separation of powers so that the final legislators can scrutinise the executive,"
The Commission presidency attracts much attention, influencing Commission aspirations and inter-institutional relationships. They prepare the annual work-programme, structuring the community agenda. Whilst appearing as an element of autonomy, it is merely to realise treaty ambitions. Under the ToA Functionally they are akin to a head of government and participate in debates and G7. Prodi's He openly acknowledged ambitions to create a "European government," The president can provide a strong sense of direction, although of course within discussed parameters of the Commission. The institutions are "constantly re-aligning themselves in inter-institutional terms;" The Commission has not welcomed unfavourable adjustments with equanimity, guarding "its exclusive right of initiative against attempts by the EP...to adapt it." During TEU It perhaps illustrates its true temperament: a power hungry, "oversized Brussels's bureaucracy." 2004 witnessed such re-adjustment as the proposed Commission was rejected. The underlying difficulty of a Commission as government is democratic legitimacy. It may argued that it is democratic: the administrative is detached from the electoral; Commission/EP terms coincide; Nonetheless, when compared to conventional governance, it appears undemocratic.
Encapsulating this "hybrid" Established conceptions are inadequate; it is sui generis. It executes governmental functions through comparable legislative, administrative, and regulatory systems. Its competence, discretion and enforcement capacity indicate it is more than a conventional administration. It is the nanny of the Union that wishes it were her own child: supervising, guiding, protecting. It is a "highly developed bureaucracy" Whilst I cannot doubt its influence; or soaring aspirations, (often exemplified by its President, or realised through the elasticity of inter-institutional relations) it traces a largely predetermined programme. Decisions are principally made in agreement with other institutions; its powers and competence spawn from shared authority, as does its subsequent legitimacy. True governance "presupposes a body made up of independent persons, with independent financial resources and significant, autonomous decision-making powers." EU governance is a story of co-decision and mediation, the Commission can only write part of this narrative. It is undemocratic, fragmented, with little collective political ideology or will, having presently reached its apex. It is a "source of leadership," Governance debates are emblematic of a deeper crisis. Enlargement and the Constitution represent a new era. If the Union becomes more state-like, more federal, the source of governance becomes increasingly important. The EU is "model of different systems of governance." At some point a more unified, centralist and participatory leadership must be created.