SWBC and its servants are relying on their EC to exempt them from liability for the damage/loss Laura incurred from SWBC's negligence. I shall advise Laura whether SWBC's EC is effective, or if she can make a negligence claim for her losses.
At common law, SWBC must illustrate incorporation of the EC into the contract; this can occur either by "signature, notice, or...course of dealing". As Laura did not sign any documents, 'notice' of the contract's conditions (EC) are required. The EC was referred to by a sign on SWBC's premises at the point where the contract was agreed; informing Laura that such conditions existed, but not enlisting their effect. An EC will be incorporated only if "reasonable notice of its existence is given." Whilst SWBC "need not show that [they] actually brought it to the notice of the other party", the sufficiency of their notice is determined by their steps taken to give notice, and the EC's nature.
With relevance to the first condition, Thompson
 held that an EC, referred to from a railway ticket stating that the contractual conditions were contained within the company timetables, had been incorporated; despite the timetable costing money, and at nearly 600 pages long, was unlikely to be read. Tritetel suggests this is "extreme": today it would represent insufficient notice. Smith
 suggests the principle of incorporation by reference is "sound", and commonly used. The EC must be contained within a contractual document, rather than one acknowledging receipt. No reference was made to the EC by the staff, tickets or receipts; a single sign above the ticket office gave notice of the conditions. I suggest this is insufficient, especially if Laura did not see the notice: Parker
 asserts that where people receive tickets containing conditions, but do not realise this, they are not bound by them. Yet if they knew there was writing, or believed it contained conditions, terms would be binding. Furthermore, in Chappleton, a sign referring to conditions printed on a ticket; which were unknown to the claimant were not binding. Subsequently, and on the basis of Henderson, which suggests a "clause is unlikely to be incorporated if there are no words on the face of a document drawing attention to it"; and as no direction/advice was given to Laura about the notice/EC; I suggest that if Laura remained unaware of it; incorporation failed.
Should SWBC claim Laura was aware/accepted the EC, Olley
 states the EC's existence must be brought to the consumer's notice before or at the time of contract formation. Whilst SWBC gave notice that terms exist, and these terms are available without further cost (unlike Thompson
), only travellers who have purchased tickets can see the contract's full terms (can't board bus without ticket); unless they have the foresight to ask. In Olley, where terms were displayed inside hotel rooms, perhaps like the inside of buses; the claimants were not bound by them as the "terms could not have been seen until later"; rhetoric that I suggest may apply here. Whilst a very questionable and perhaps unreasonable general notice of terms was given, actual notice was delayed until, like Olley, Laura boarded the bus: it may not be contemporaneous.
Additionally, the more unusual/unexpected the conditions are, the higher the degree of notice required. ECs are relatively common and perhaps expected: they are a general method of managing risk/liability. Perhaps however, a LC, like the one used in Thompson, would be more reasonable, commonplace, and therefore anticipated. In Thornton,
 Denning suggests clauses which are unexpected demand to "be printed in red", with a "red hand" pointing to them. Whilst Thornton
 did refer to PI; Laura could argue the exclusion of all liability was unexpected, subsequently demanding a greater degree of notice than one small sign that, for those consumers in a hurry, was unlikely to be seen. Consequently, I suggest SWBC's notice is insufficient, and unlikely to be incorporated.
Nevertheless, SWBC could argue their terms were incorporated by a previous "course of dealing". 
McCutcheon
 states that "previous dealings are only relevant if they prove knowledge of terms"; which must be "actual not constructive", and establish "consent" to them. This position is however "inconsistent" with Spurling,
 which asserts that previous dealings may mean the usual requirements of incorporation, i.e. consent and knowledge, do not apply. As Laura has made this trip from "time to time", she may be aware of SWBC's terms (seen them inside coach), and may therefore have accepted them on contract formation. From the facts provided, I suggest it is unlikely that Laura was aware of the EC; let alone accepting it. Furthermore, McCutcheon
 states terms may not apply if the transaction "was not a part of consistent dealings", or was spread over a period of time. Hollier, purports that three/four transactions over a period of five years was insufficient; whereas Hardwick
 asserts that three/four contracts per month over several years was adequate, illustrating acceptance/knowledge over a consistent period. Hollier
also states that for private consumers like Laura, "considerable" past dealings would be required. Laura has only made this trip from "time to time": intermittently. I propose she has no knowledge of the EC, or acceptance; and in any case has not fulfilled the consistent course of dealings required by McCutcheon, 
Hollier, or the relevant case law. Incorporation through previous dealings is improbable.
Assuming SWBC's EC was effectively incorporated, the court will examine its construction and interpretation: whether the EC covers the situation. It will be interpreted contra Proferentem: against those who seek to use it; requiring clear, unambiguous wording. Morris
 asserts that ambiguity is constructed "in the way least favourable to the relying party"; whilst Alisa-Craig states EC's will be interpreted literally. SWBC's EC appears to be of a standard, commonly used form. It can be easily understood and recognised by consumers. Secondly, it expressly covers any "loss or damage" to "passenger's" goods; applying directly to Laura's situation. Furthermore, unlike Glynn it does not conflict with the main purpose of the contract, and, under Thompson, is not "so unreasonable that no-one would contemplate that [it] exist[s]".
For SWBC's EC to have effect it must be compatible with UCTA and UTCCR, which contain "important legislative limitations". Laura must argue the EC is unreasonable under either act. UCTA makes specific EC's ineffective "in all circumstances"; whilst others ineffective unless they are reasonable. UCTA distinguishes between consumer/business transactions. Laura dealt as a consumer, like in Peter
: she did not "make the contract in the course of business", 
and SWBC made "the contract in the course of business", under S.12(1)(a). As SWBC's EC does not exclude: negligence liability for death/PI, consumer goods guarantees, or product liability; it is not disqualified under the excluded terms, but is subject to the requirement of reasonableness. Under S.2(2), negligence liability creating harm other than death/PI may be excluded as long as it is reasonable. Negligence is defined as "a breach of an obligation to exercise reasonable care" under S.1(a), and applies to Laura's experience: her loss/damage was caused by negligence.
The court will examine SWBC's EC under S2 in light of reasonableness. S11 defines a reasonable term as "a fair and reasonable one to be included", regarding the circumstances which "were, or ought reasonably to have been" known/contemplated by the parties at the time of contract formation. As a "judicially administered requirement of reasonableness is a source of uncertainty", UCTA lays down a rule, and guidelines for reasonableness. The term must be reasonable at the time of contract formation (S.11(1)), thus it will "not become unreasonable as a result of subsequent events". S11 refers to Schedule Two, which details factors that the court may consider when determining reasonableness under S6/S7. However, S6 (goods sale) and S7 (goods exchange) do not specifically apply to Laura's contract, which is the provision of a service, rather than the sale/exchange of goods. Whilst Schedule Two appears relevant only to transactions under the SGA, as S.11(1) is a broad provision, court's normally consider reasonableness under common-law cases whilst "having regard" for Schedule Two's provisions: "even in cases which do not fall within the scope of sections 6 and 7": Laura's is such a case.
Under S.11(5) the onus is on SWBC to prove that the EC is reasonable. Schedule Two lists a number of factors that may be considered. Firstly: The bargaining strengths of the parties, and the availability of alternative supplies: Laura had no opportunity to bargain with SWBC, the terms were 'standard form,' and non-negotiable; whilst public transport is usually limited to a single provider; restricting choice. Furthermore, other companies may have similar policies. Secondly: Whether the customer "received an inducement to agree to the term": Laura did not receive any inducement, but it may be of significance that the cost of bus tickets is usually low; thus an EC may be reasonable. Thirdly: Whether the customer knew or ought to reasonably have known the existence or extent of the term: Laura's knowledge, if she was unaware of the notice and as she has only travelled from "time to time" is poor; therefore it would be unreasonable for her to accept these terms; particularly as she would have limited prior knowledge at the time of contract formation - terms were only displayed on the coach. Smith, asserts it is impossible to create an exhaustive list of factors to consider reasonableness; whilst the "ability of the parties to bear...loss" can be considered. This raises the issue of insurance: it may have been possible for either party to insure their goods. It may be difficult for SWBC to insure as they would never know the type/value of goods they were carrying; but they could have insured it to a limit and used a LC. Nonetheless, Laura could have had personal travel/phone insurance. Mitchell
 suggests there will be "room for a legitimate difference of judicial opinion"; permitting some discretion in the reasonableness test. On the balance of probabilities, Laura's unequal bargaining power, limited previous knowledge, and lack of choice, and the extremity of excluding all liability are indicative of unreasonableness under S11.(1). Furthermore, under S11(3) the 'notice' SWBC are relying on must be "fair and reasonable"; I propose it is not.
For SWBC's EC to be effective, it must also satisfy UTCCR. UTCCR applies to unfair terms that have not been "individually negotiated". SWBC's EC was not individually negotiated under Regs.5(2): it was a 'standard-form' contract "drafted in advance" of their transaction, and Laura was unable to "influence" its substance.
Under Regs.8(1), UTCCR applies where one party is a business, and the other a consumer. SWBC is a "seller" or "supplier": "acting for the purposes of [their] trade, business or profession"; whilst Laura is a "consumer", "acting outside trade, business or profession" (Regs.3(1)). A term will, under Regs.5, be regarded as unfair if it is "contrary to the requirement of good faith, causing a significant imbalance in the parties' rights and obligations arising under the contract, to" Laura's "detriment".
Firstly a "significant imbalance of rights must exist". The precise meaning of 'significant' is "elusive"; the Regulations appearing "silent" as regards the burden of proof for unfairness: some discretion/flexibility exists. The court will consider the nature of goods/services, and all circumstances "attending the contract's conclusion". Assessments of fairness do not relate to the "main subject matter", or the adequacy of price/goods/services. In this "service" contract, it is relevant that Laura was in a position to "appreciate the risk". UTCCR examines terms in context, rather than singularity. I would assert the EC may create an 'imbalance:' it excludes all liability (perhaps unreasonably), Laura did not appreciate the risk or understand the terms/conditions, she has limited knowledge of the terms and a weak bargaining position: SWBC 'hold all the cards.'
Secondly, the transaction must be "in good faith", defined under FNB
 as "one of fair and open dealing." The term must be expressed openly: "fully, clearly and legibly", whilst ensuring the SWBC do not "take advantage of necessity, indigence, lack of experience, unfamiliarity...or weak bargaining position". I would assert Laura has a very weak bargaining position (SWBC may have a monopoly on the market) whilst the EC was not expressed 'fully' or 'clearly'. Furthermore, Schedule Two contains an "indicative and non-exhaustive list of terms which may be regarded as unfair". Schedule Two(i): Laura can argue she was bound to terms which she had no "opportunity of becoming acquainted before the contract's conclusion"; a strong argument reflecting the "common law position" regarding incorporation "by notice"; reiterating SWBC's difficulties concerning incorporation. It is probable that the EC is "not binding" under Regs.8(1): it creates clear "detriments" to consumers.
Laura's loss was incurred as a result of third party negligence. She may be able to argue that SWBC's EC does not cover their employees. Under the privity of contract, third parties not party to the original contract have historically not been protected by EC's, even where it purports to include them: Scruttons, where a company's employees damaged customers' goods, held that employees could not rely on the contracted LC as they were "not party to the contract" (also Adler
). However, as this precedent was "commercially inconvenient", 
NZS
 established that "any reference to a third party within the contract" will extend the EC's protection to them; establishing a "collateral" contract between consumers/third parties. The court may also regard C(RTP). Under S1 C(RTP) Act, whilst SWBC's employees are not a contracting party, they may "enforce a term of the contract", i.e. the EC, as the contract "expressly provides" they may under (S1(1)(a)). S1(3) Requires the party to be "expressly identified", which they are as they answer the description of employees.
Laura is in a strong position to make a claim for her losses. Whilst SWBC's EC is well constructed, it is unlikely to be incorporated: notice is unreasonable; whilst incorporation through dealings is improbable: Laura travelled from "time to time". It is unreasonable under UCTA and unfair under UTCCR. Paradoxically, if effective, it would cover SWBC's employees.