EC environmental law has been a sporadic, almost ad-hoc appendage to European competence. Initial regulation was incidental, created through measures of approximisation for free-trade purposes. Later developments became more comprehensive. I will analyse the systems operation, extensiveness, effectiveness and accessibility. This narrative cannot be an abstract debate concerning the evolution of a legal competence; it must be placed in context. Can an economically-centred union really provide a balanced approach towards environmental sustainability; will it be typically anthropocentric, restricting regulation for financial gain, an economic quantification of the environment? Or will it create a comprehensive, accessible legal order with the essential supremacy and collective resources to fight this international issue effectively?
Created from the ashes of war-torn Europe in the form of the ECSC, the EC was an economic union to create prosperity from a common-market, and prevent wars. The 1957 EC Treaty created a more recognisable inauguration, whilst the Merger Treaty formally established the EEC (1965). The UK joined following the Treaty of Accession. To operate effectively, MS's economic controls had to be harmonised. This was realised through the establishment of a new, sovereign "European legal heritage:" Directives, Regulations and Decisions. Directives are binding as to the result to be achieved; leaving appropriate implementation to MS's. Regulations are universally applicable, automatically transposed into MS law in community form. Decisions (Article 249EC) are legal pronouncements only binding on those they address. The EC was renamed EU following the TEU, establishing a three pillar structure: the EC (the legally-binding, decision-making processes); CFSP, and JHA.
Environmental concerns were unacknowledged in early treaties; the need to "re-organise industries and promote self sufficiency in food" took precedence. Initial environmental control was incidental to regulation. Directives, entirely economic in both structure and aspiration, were used to create a level playing-field for the common-market, harmonising existing MS regulations. Whilst the EC was fertile and alive, it was in its foetal stage, operating purely within prescribed boundaries: economic development was paramount. The relatively "affluent" period that ensued saw the "promulgation of quasi-environmental legislation" through approximating measures, e.g. dangerous substance classification. Legitimising regulation was difficult: no relevant treaty provisions existed. General responsibility was assumed under Article 2EC ("progressive approximation of economic policies of MSs', harmonious development...and raising the standard of living"), as improved living-standards cannot occur in poor environments; and economic policies cannot be realised without environmental impact. Early environmental legislation was invoked under Articles 94/308. Article 94 legitimised directives which harmonised MS laws directly affecting common-market establishment/functioning. Intended to achieve uniformity for economic efficiency, it closely linked environmental and economic policy, recognising that stricter environmental principles may limit trade, consequently condoning regulation. It yielded indirect benefits by harmonising existing, and future environmental regulation. Article 308, used for purer environmental directives, accomplished objectives that existing provisions could not realise, even if these objectives were unacknowledged in treaty provisions. Institutions had to illustrate the legal base was threatened, if so it consequently became a "catch-all" provision, upholding community objectives. Environmental control became such an objective, thus it was assumed justifiable, particularly when affirmed by the ECJ in cases challenging the community's assumed competence.
Environmental issues became increasing apparent, yet the system's inadequacy sacrificed protection for economic furtherance, focusing on dismantling "barriers to free movement of goods, persons, services, and capital." It was reactive, operating purely within the economics that restrained it. Directives were adopted in a piece-meal fashion with "little consideration" for competence; presented not as environmental instruments, but measures for "...creating a level playing field;" a faade to Article 94/308's limitations. MS's challenged the legitimacy. Articles 308/94 were unreliable and insufficient; haphazardly extending competence. Moreover, could the community's central purpose (free-trade) operate if restrained by environmental regulation? Politically the EC was still very much an economic union; MSs' were sceptical of community power and ambition. ECJ interjection was crucial to preventing regulation being "overborne by the dominant paradigm of free-trade." 
Commission v Italy
 claimed Article 94 had been misappropriated to justify the Detergents Directive as the Rome Treaty did not acknowledge environmental provisions: control was "at the fringe" of community competence. The ECJ however stressed Article 94's significance for harmonising and preventing "distortion;" justifying environmental objectives. Significantly, the case also imposes the first financial penalty relating to the environment. In Cornelius Kramer,  the ECJ held that fishing-quota agreements between the community and MS's did not breach free-trade principles. Moreover, under Article 10EC MS's were under "a duty not to enter into any commitment within the framework of those conventions which could hinder the Community in carrying out the tasks." It was the beginning of the "co-operation principle" that structures and justifies much of the "institutional context" of the regime. It established the environmental norm of "connexion:" realisation that without stock-control, future availability would decrease; perhaps itself a successful fusion of environmental and economic principles. Case 240/83
 stated protection was an "essential objective...which can legitimately restrict"  free-trade, albeit limited by principles of proportionality and non-discrimination. It at least appeared sufficient justification to prolong Article 94/308's usage. This staggered development, whilst not ideal, did initiate a more inclusive legal-framework, the ECJ often initiating guiding principles and ideologies, e.g. polluter pays principle (Case 240/83
). Yet it remained largely fragmented; divided by economic preference and imposed restrictions, e.g. Danish Bottles effectively prevented MSs establishing stricter domestic legislation above community law.
Later developments, spearheaded by a more integrated, policy-lead approach demanded specific environmental policies following "distress about environmental degradation...disasters and the politicization of the environmental movement." Community ambitions could no longer "be imagined in the absence of an effective campaign to...[protect] the environment;" acknowledging connections between "economic growth and environmental degradation." The Commission and Council created the first EAP, strategising advancement. The first two EAPs initiated sea/freshwater control: protection from dangerous substances and hydrocarbons; monitoring/inspection; industrial control; and the adjustment of regulation "in context [of] international conventions." It implored environmental principles such as the polluter-pays: "costs of environmental pollution should be borne by the person causing it, not by the community at large." Later EAPs developed control in waste (prevention, recycling, safe-disposal); air quality, and prevention of environmental harms. By creating comprehensive policy, subsequent regulation was more co-ordinated, particularly when compared to the piece-meal measures of the previous era.
Establishment of a separate, environmental Directorate-General (1981) within the Commission sustained this development. It quickly acquired a "reputation for activism" and "green policies," focusing on synchronising and integrating protection into other EC competences. Finally, following the 1985 IGC leaders created a specialist environmental legal base under the SEA Treaty: Articles l7-l76 dedicated to environmental policy. It was to create a justifiable, pro-active and unchallengeable regime. It introduced the principle of integration, later prioritised in the 5 thEAP and ToA, encouraging the assimilation of environmental policies/principles into other EC competences; itself a form of more sustainable development. The SEA recognised that MS's could adopt stricter protection above community levels (after Commission consultation), allegedly prioritising protection over free-trade. It initiated a "proactive international regime:" Article 174(1) promoted "measures at an international level to deal with regional or worldwide environmental problems," whilst Article 174(4) encouraged co-operation "with third countries and...competent international organisations." Pragmatically, it presents "a less rigid view of the state" with "fluid" boundaries, acknowledging that environmental issues have inter-state causes and consequences; to be effective international co-operation is essential. "Effective environmental problem-solving cannot take place without shared environmental norms and the evolution of these norms." Its "international credibility" was exemplified by later engagement with the Montreal Protocol, UNCED, and pre-negotiation before Kyoto; mediating to secure MS participation. The EU has signed "30 international treaties since 1974."
Article 95 used QMV and co-decision with the EP for internal-market protection, making "...legislation easier to agree, speedier and to a higher standard;" frequently preventing invocation of the lowest common denominator. Co-decision procedures (Article 251) with the EP increased participation, amplifying political involvement (e.g. Greenpeace), creating a greater forum for environmental debate. The SEA (principally Article 174) affirmed further environmental principles for "formation of policy," e.g. precautionary principle. Together with the ECJ, these have been used "as a basis for validating the parasitic legislation of environmental measures." Kramer argues they are "essentially political in nature, devoid of direct legal consequences." Significant in shaping and justifying policy, I suggest they should "be welcomed" as form of underlying rationalization, creating a more consistent, inclusive application of law.
Whilst Article 174.1 gave "wide potential," restrictions were imposed (Article 130r.4) by "the principle of subsidiary," limiting legislative competence to where proposals were "better achieved by the community." Articles 95 and 170 appeared "confusing, ambiguous, and contradictory;" using different decision-making procedures to establish similar results. Article 95 centres on harmonising MS law to develop regulation within the internal-market. Article 175 allows legally binding instruments to be adopted that have direct action for "specific environmental protection," establishing purer, more targeted environmental control. The two measures created an alarming degree of misapprehension concerning the establishment of stricter domestic legislation: numerous cases arise attempting to determine the appropriate base. Traditional conflict exists between regulation and free-movement of goods (Article 28), itself central to EC philosophy. Radically, measures against free-trade for "wider public interests" were permitted, such exceptions existing under Article 30. They must be proportionate and indiscriminate. The "rule of reason" (case 120/78) may also be invoked, preserving MS rules that deviate from community principles for "overriding, wider public interest[s]," or "mandatory requirements." Originally only useable where "national legislation is indistinctly applicable," later ECJ development (Case C-203/96) appeared to relax this rule. Confusingly, potential for developing stricter legislation is dependent on the legal base invoked: Article 176 implies that Article 175 measures tolerate stricter domestic legislation; whereas Article 95 (because of its harmonisation function) leaves "little opportunity to develop stricter domestic legislation," positively restraining development. However, under Article 95(4) MS's may maintain stricter domestic legislation (where lesser EC regulation is introduced) if "necessary and proportionate;" whilst Article 95(5) permits domestic measures where MS's "deem necessary," based upon "new scientific evidence." It presents a more willing and flexible Union better equipped to address environmental concerns, potentially at economic expense.
Post-SEA development was initially sluggish "because of political reasons linked to national sovereignty." Ultimately however, many beneficial economic mechanisms harmonising (e.g. CO2) and promoting environmental protection were established. This included the proliferation of ancillary bodies/schemes, illustrating more sustainable, two-pronged regulation: sovereign, 'top-down' legal instruments and pro-active, 'grass-roots' ground-level monitoring/development, e.g. ENVIREG, providing 500 Million for community regional-policy measures. The MEDSPA programme targeted specific regions, whilst "LIFE" (1992) was established to assist development and implementation of policy where the EU co-finances development of MS's and "third countries bordering the Mediterranean and the Baltic Sea;" expanding co-operation and assistance to third-countries. EEA establishment, which dictates regulatory standards, was a significant advancement, promoting internal/international co-ordination. "Likely to become more important over the next decade," I feel it would better employed as an active enforcer.
The 1993 TEU gave protection "a formal place among the aims of the EC:" the community should promote high levels of "protection and improvements to the quality of the environment." Previously, economic and developmental divergence between MSs meant achieving common environmental polices was difficult; usually relapsing to the "lowest common-denominator." Unsurprisingly, the proviso for high protection levels was, as development had been previously, qualified by consideration of the "diversity of situations in...various regions of the community." Whilst it would be undesirable and impracticable for strict policies to simply be imposed, realistically, the EU needs to take the lead in increasing the agenda to prevent environmental calamity. MS's are too ready to promote economics above protection; presently however, the union is only as strong as MS determine through treaty negotiations. Consequently, Article 2 made modest advancement. Article 2 recognised sustainable development and non-inflationary growth. Article 3 provided for more specific environmental strategies, leading "to a large promotion of sustainable development policies," a principle debuted in the 5 thEAP that would become the guiding aspiration for future development. Article 174 ensured policy development through the co-operation procedure; consequently environmental principles would infiltrate other EC policies. Post-SEA/TEU development moved away from approximisation towards a "systematic framework"  of regulation that MS's must conform to: a "reciprocal stimulation of change." Founded not just on treaties or secondary law, but also international agreements, it became characterised by encouraging "'participation', 'reflexivity' and 'deliberation.'"  The 5 thEAP initiated the process, departing from "command and control" directives, moving from "top-down to bottom-up" methods that encouraged "self-regulatory" participation through market-based instruments. Whilst policy is centrally determined, MS's can "implement...environmental law discretionally." Arguably, this may cause a dilution of policy. Yet the "procedures for implementation...[are] restricted,"  reinforcing the regime, promoting the self-development of an effective normative system in which "environmental practices may be improved." The subsequent ToA demanded further integration of environmental protection, increasing sustainable development; whilst extending co-decision procedures to Article 95/175, increasing participation in environmental debate.
The EU presents a "new mode of environmental governance," creating a sovereign "legal heritage" directly effective in MS law, which must be implemented and upheld; a perfect system to ensure MSs' adopt environmental measures. Where un-enforced "individuals or NGO's" have potential to utilise Direct Effect, where regulations, decisions, and certain directives are effective in MS law without transposition. Furthermore, it appears that "even where directives are not directly effective, individuals may...rely on the Von Colson principle:" domestic courts must interpret in light of EC law. Post-SEA/TEU development acknowledged individual's rights and obligations. Case C-131/88,178 illustrated that directives can "offer individuals environmental rights;" yet accessibility to such rights is dubious. Right exists for "any legal person" to initiate proceedings before the ECJ; ideally therefore, NGOs would possess this capacity. Despite these provisions, accessibility is limited and societal actors are restricted: "direct and individual concern" is necessary. The Von Colson principle is also restricted, as is access through MS courts by way of Standing. The system cultivated therefore places responsibility on MS's and EC institutions, to which the "ECJ must review." Is this sufficient? The 5 thEAP found a "slow but relentless deterioration . . . of the environment." Effectiveness is dependant on the "political will of the MS's," who frequently "minimise their legal obligations." "Protection policies are pointless if countries fail to keep their promises:" 1,395 examples of non-compliance exist. With restricted access, enforcement is dependant on the Commission, an under-funded, under-staffed bureaucracy better equipped to legislate than enforce. The list of breaches is "getting longer rather than shorter."
Pre-SEA measures had "weak foundation[s]." Fragmented and unreliable, it resisted real protection for economic advancement. The SEA, ECJ and EAPs sustained an increasingly decisive, policy-lead approach through principles and objectives; a dream of environmental sustainability. Finally, a consciousness exists that we cannot prolong Earth's exploitation for economic furtherance, how ironic it should come from an economic union. It fabricated a comprehensive system with "more hope, more chance, more opportunity than most people are prepared to understand or accept:" Economic integration of environmental principles through a sovereign legal system, with sufficient supremacy and momentum towards sustainability to make unpopular, but beneficial, long-term decisions. Originally staid and inflexible, the normative structure now implores "participation," responsiveness and elasticity; potential for MSs' to develop further protection. Economics define the modern world. This regime can make environmental regulation intrinsic to economic advancement, realising sustainable values. Yet the "proliferation" of legislation "will not alleviate environmental deterioration." Inaccessible, intangible and poorly enforced it is too dependent on the "political will of... MSs." The EEA needs to evolve into a regulatory/enforcement body to realise the system's full potential. The EC is the "most important influence" on UK environmental law, but as a nation we do not recognise this. The UK has an acceptance problem. No longer are we supreme. We must co-operate. "No environmental matter, except possibly dog mess and litter, can be dealt with...nationally." Will we have the courage to advance, or will our history "stultify us in a...sentimental attachment to a world that is past."