The report consisted of the design and analysis of a commercial meat slicer, which connected between an AC motor with speed of 1800rpm and a grinder with an output speed of ~90rpm. A variety of calculations would be performed for different major components. Computer program would also be used in order to compare the results from computer modeling to manual calculations. A computer aid design drawing would be conducted and presented near the final stage and an appropriate size of gearbox housing would be designed.
After the analysis the optimal gearbox should have a double reduction system with gear ratios of 4.472. Optimal gears would have a size of 36mm and 161mm gear diameters with 27mm thickness and the optimal shafts would have a diameter of 12mm and 25mm with a length of 100mm. Bearings would be selected based on the size of the shaft, the revolution speed and the maximum loading, diameter of 12mm and 25mm bearings with thickness of 18mm and 37.5 respectively were finally considered in order to achieve the optimal performance. Finally, the optimal size of gearbox housing was set to be in order to enable the operation effective and safe.
Unfortunately the computer program did not operate as expected so that the comparison between computer results and manual calculations could not be conducted. However, the variation of parameters in the computer program was limited so that only a limited number of comparisons could be done even though the programs were working properly. More developments and improvements were required in gear and shaft program so that a variety of variables could be selected for analysis.
The assignment consisted of the design and analysis of a reduction gearbox which would be used for a commercial meat slicer. Appropriate components such as gears, shafts, bearings and housing would be selected and investigated in order to satisfy the requirement. A variety of calculations would firstly be performed in order to ensure the bending and surface stress conditions were within the safety limit, different dimensions would also be examined so that the optimal output could be achieved. A spreadsheet would be created in order to summarize all the possible arrangements. On the other hand, the shaft would be designed based on the optimal gear parameters, bending moment diagrams and shear force diagrams were constructed in order to perform analysis on bending. Computer program would also be used in order to determine and compare results of shaft between computer outcome and calculating results. Finally, bearings for corresponding shafts would also be selected based on their rotating speed and maximum load. A computer aid design (CAD) drawing would also be presented in order to recognize any constraints for the physical arrangement in the gearbox and hence the smallest possible gearbox housing could be constructed.
In the design process, a number of analyses were carried out in order to achieve an optimal gearbox design for a commercial meat slicer. The manual calculations were carried out smoothly and a number of gear combinations were investigated. Unfortunately the computer program did not operate as expected so that both results could not be compared. However, the computer program only offered a limited number of variables which meant the flexibility was limited even such program run normally.
Nevertheless, manual calculations enable a more flexible and reliable analysis during design process, hence the volume of the gear box could be minimized more easily. After a range of manual calculations, the gearbox could be operated as requested from 1800rpm to ~90rpm, using a double reduction gearbox with gear ratios of ~4.472. After that, the minimal gear diameters of 36mm and 161mm with 27mm thickness were selected for small and large gears respectively. Such values were then utilized for shaft analysis and hence bearing analysis near the final stage. Finally, two 25mm and one 12mm diameter shafts with 100mm length were chosen for gearbox shafts and 6 bearings (25mm and 12mm diameter with 37.5mm and 18mm thickness respectively) were selected to support the corresponding shafts.
The gearbox design was then constructed in SolidWorks, CAD drawing was then produced in order to minimize the required gearbox housing. A size of was used for the housing and a thickness of 12mm was reserved as a safety basis.