Within the last five years there were a total of 1996 visits to the doctor. The average value is 1996/100=19.96 visits per person per five years
Looking at the sum (Table 1, Table 2) for each of the sexes shows an obvious result. It is clear that women outnumber visits to the doctor compared to men at a ratio of almost 5:2. However, this isn't enough to justify the claim that women visit the doctor more often than men. For example, a handful of women could have visited a number of times thereby increasing the sum. There are also more women than men in the sample of 100 meaning the use of the sum isn't justifiable.
The mean of visits to the doctor is larger in women. This is also true with the median. After calculating (and omitting) any outliers i.e. data outside of two standard deviation the means were 9.894 for men and 22.27 for women. There is still a large difference between the two groups of data. This data supports the claim that more women visit the doctors than men.
My theory is that it is possible that women do go to the doctors more often than men. However, it is a far better idea to decide why this is. I plan to investigate what affect the age of a woman or man has on the frequency of visits as it is a key factor in why people visit the doctor.
The mean age of each sex shows they're almost exactly the same. The men and women in the sample are approximately the same age. The measure of spread (the standard deviation in this case) shows that their dispersion is also almost equal with a difference of only 0.75 Years. The median value of 42.5 is common between each sex.
To compare the relationship between age and frequency of visits I have produced a scatter graph for each sex
Regarding Figure 1 and Figure 2, although there appears to be a relationship for the male data this cannot be said for the female data. Because of this I feel it isn't justifiable to link the two data together in a relationship. Due to this I will simply focus on the frequency of visits for each sex.
The health of an individual of course will determine how much they visit the doctor. I believe that the only reason why an individual would visit the doctor is if they had bad health. In the data set 5/42 (or approximately 11.90%) of men were classed as having bad health compared to the female equivalent of 14/58 (or 24.13%) which is approximately double that of the male value.
Finally, after putting the data into a histogram it's clear that both sets of data are right skewed i.e. Mean&gt;Media&gt;Mode.
By using a population of 40 million per sex (this is approximately the population of Germany, the source of data) I calculated the distributions using Poisson
Both populations appear to follow a normal distribution. The female data is perhaps more bell shaped and follows the standard normal distribution. However, the male data has remained skewed
Using my existing data I can comment on what I would expect with the new sample from the same population.