The emergence of new regulations on information and consultation rights for employees in the UK, transpositioned from the EU information and consultation Directive (Directive 2002/14/EC OJ L80/29-34) has provoked keen interest and reactions from industrial relations scholars, employers' and employees' bodies, official authorities and trade union organisations. The importance of these new rules is defined, on the one hand, by the legal implications arising from that for the first time the UK has, as Hall (2005:103) puts it 'a general statutory framework giving employees the right to insist on being informed and consulted by their employers on a range of key business, employment and restructuring issues'. On the other hand, the new regulations are perceived by many as key, as they objectify a possible answer to a major problem in UK industrial relations - the 'representation gap'. The evidence that such a 'representation gap' exists is quite strong - in their analysis of the first findings of the Workplace Employment Relations Survey (WERS) 2004, Kersley et al summarise that only 36% of workplaces (both private and public sector) with 10 and more employees in the UK have trade union members. This leaves a huge 64% of workplaces with no union representation which is an increasing trend compared to the 57% of such workplaces quoted in WERS 1998. Moving to alternative forms of representative 'voice' Kersley et al (2004:14) point to the fact that only 14% of the workplaces have joint consultative committees (20% in 1998) and a mere 25% operate a consultative forum at a higher level (compared to 27% in 1998). As for the qualitative aspects of information likely to be discussed with employees or their representatives the same sources state that it is staffing plans that are brought forward most often (in 64% of the cases in 2004 and 61% in 1998), rather than the financial position of the company (51% in 2004 decreasing from 66% in 1998) or investment plans (41% in 2004, down from 50% in 1998). All this illustrates that both the quantity and quality of information exchanged between employers and employees as well as the representation and feedback mechanisms need to be improved and the new regulations granting information and consultation rights are looked upon as a possible solution. In this, their significance is anticipated to be key and change-prompting.
Before moving on, it is felt that clarification of the terms of 'consultation', 'negotiation' and 'collective bargaining', incorporated in the DTI quotation in the text title is necessary, as it will make further discussion on the features of new legal rights and their implications much more feasible. As Dill and Oxenbridge comment (2003:33) the blurring of boundaries between these terms is 'often an issue in workplaces where the employer/employee discussions [have] focused exclusively on pay bargaining involving the trade union.' Still, using definitions from the EMIRE part of the European Industrial Relations Observatory (EIRO) homepage we could refer to the term of consultation as the 'process of discussion and debate (...) between employers and employees, usually distinguished from collective bargaining and negotiation in that it does not imply a process of bargaining, compromise and joint agreement but is rather a means through which employers seek views before deciding on action.' Drawing on the same source, collective bargaining will be perceived as 'necessarily containing an element of negotiation and hence as distinct from processes of consultation, from which negotiation is absent, and where outcomes are determined unilaterally by the employer". Consultation should then be referred to the broader process of asking feedback from employees on certain key issues in the organisation, which may not necessarily result in this feedback being implemented, while the process of negotiation (by means of collective bargaining for example or leading to joint decision-making) is firmly oriented towards agreeing on results (often on pay issues) (see also DTI Guidance on Information and Consultation Regulations 2005).
In addition, the distinction between the processes of 'information' and 'consultation' should be noted. For the purpose of this essay the definitions used by Dill and Oxenbridge in their ACAS research paper (2003:12) will be taken into consideration:
These definitions would suggest a form of continuum which sees the provision of information as the first most basic level of employer-employee communication, followed by involvement in consultation, when management still has full prerogative on decision-making, finally reaching negotiation which allows for employees' agendas to be introduced. Sisson (2002:16) supports the idea of kind of continuum but reinforces that
Having clarified terms and established the importance and relevance of the debate around the new regulations on information and consultation rights for employees, this essay will attempt to discuss the form of the new legal rights, provide a summary of the perspectives of all the actors affected by them - employers, employees and trade unions, and assess the likely significance and impact of the new legislation. By looking into the possibilities incorporated in them, it will try to demonstrate that the effect of the new rules, although eagerly anticipated and extolled by official institutions, might not be that quick or dramatic for employment relations in the UK as yet.
Although regulations on information and consultation rights should be transposed by means of the EU Directive into all countries - members of the EU and the process is currently at various stages of progress, this text will concentrate only on the effect they have in the UK, due to limitations of space and relevance to the topic of the essay.
The Information and Consultation of Employees (ICE) Regulations entered into force in the UK on 6 April 2005, transposing the European Information and Consultation Directive in a framework agreed jointly by the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), the Trade Union Congress (TUC) and the Confederation of British Industry (CBI), this multi-sided approach representing as Hall has rightly pointed out 'a notable departure in the UK context' (2005:104). Here several features of the regulations' form will be commented upon.
It is clear that law and legal enactment are becoming more and more important with regard to regulating industrial relations in Britain. The new regulations on information and consultation rights for employees serve only to underpin the shift from the traditional voluntarist system of regulation to more statutory models, controlled by the state. Yet, by examining several features of the form, application and concerned parties' involvement with regard to new ICE regulations, this essay has attempted to demonstrate that, for the time being, they may not have the strong normative effect they have been predicted to have. As Hall states they 'do not constitute a new phenomenon and there is already a wide range of precedents and examples on which [skilled] negotiators will be able to draw' (2005:123). Moreover, and emphasizing the employers' flexibility in applying them, the same author argues that 'the ICE Regulations fallback provisions are extremely 'minimalist' in infrastructural terms, and offer little by way of an operational template' (2005:123). It can be inferred then that as Beaumont and Hunter (2003) predict their success will be strongly dependant on the will of trade unions and especially employers and employees to challenge their traditional perceptions. As DTI (2005:4-5) points out 'decision-making remains the responsibility of managers' but that could stem form inability to implement provisions properly, alongside as well as instead of some of their inherent features. In addition, as Beaumont and Hunter (2003) argue new legislative forms may mean that managers will be more likely to listen to their employees, recognize the benefits this different form of cooperation may bring and incorporate it in new styles of leadership.
In summary, it is evident that new ICE regulations possess strong intrinsic potential to introduce new employee rights and take employer-employee interaction and cooperation to a new level, but there is great dependence on involved actors' interest, sufficient training of representatives and more proactive union response. It may be early days yet but these elements seem to be lacking currently in the employment relations with regard to ICE regulations which makes their effect for the time being if not dubious, then highly limited.
Finally, it should be mentioned that as Hall (2005:125) notes 'it would be foolhardy to make firm predictions about the likely impact of the Regulations in practice'. This essay has attempted some tentative forecasts, based on current conditions, but it is a question to be further researched as the new legislation comes fully into force and begins to be implemented under the influence of different factors and actors.