The implementation of the 1994 EU Directive on European Works Councils (EWCs) with the subsequent establishment of consultative bodies at European level in multinational companies (MNCs) has provoked research interest on the side of academics and practitioners for several reasons. First of all, the councils are seen, as 'the most significant institutional innovation in European-level company-based industrial relations' (Hall and Marginson 2005:1) as they present a novel approach to granting information and consultation rights for employees in MNCs. As such, EWCs are considered as a possible solution for closing the emerging gap between managerial decision-making at corporate cross-border level and employee representation at national level (Hallal. 2003). This, in turn, leads to raised hopes about the Europeanisation of industrial relation systems, human resource management practices and management-labour interaction on the continent (see also Wills 2000). Logically, another motive for researching EWCs arises, as it is becomes visible that they concentrate the different expectations and prerogatives of the industrial actors involved in their operation - as Wills notes 'companies might be expected to use these new institutions to impart the corporate vision, to transfer productivity gains and to benchmark best practice from one place to another (...), [while] trade unionists are hoping to raise European standards through EWCs' (1999:19). Last but not least, M
This essay will attempt to identify the advantages and disadvantages that EWCs might and actually offer for the management side of the companies where such bodies have been established. It will first review the nature of the EWCs with regard to their introduction, implementation and operation as defined by the European directive and will continue to suggest some of the benefits and costs employers experience in making use of them. Finally, it will provide an evaluating conclusion on the predominance of the opportunities or threats EWCs present for companies' management, drawing on the evidence presented. In doing so, the text will refer to investigations that have used survey methodology (Nakano 1999, Wills 1999), interviews (Lamers 1998, Weber et al 2000) and case-study reports (Cressey 1998, Royle 1999, Wills 2000).
The European Works Council Directive (94/45/EC) was adopted in 1994 under the Maastricht Treaty's 'social protocol' and applied to all then 15 countries-members of the European Union (EU), except UK which opted out. Its coverage was later extended to include the three European Economic Area (EEA) countries, non-members of EU (Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway) in 1995, UK (after the Labour government reversal of the opt-out policy) in 1997 and the 10 new member states after the enlargement process in 2004. The main aim of the Directive is to foster information and consultation procedures, most often through the establishment of EWCs in Community-scale undertakings with at least 1000 employees, of which at least 150 each in two or more member states (see also Carley and Hall 2000). Quoting figures compiled by the European Trade Union Institute (ETUI), an EIRO (2004) report claims that the number of companies that fall within the scope of the Directive is 2,169 after the enlargement in 2004. The same report notes that, out of this number, the companies that have a working EWC in place are 737 - a figure which despite representing only one third of the organisations currently covered by the Directive, signifies, according to the EIRO analysis that 'EWCs have become an established feature of the European industrial relations landscape' (2004:14).
As far as the implementation mechanisms are concerned, the Directive allowed for procedures that were tailored and customized to the companies' specific needs and circumstances (Carley and Hall 2000). The MNCs were given three options - a voluntary agreement to be negotiated before the Directive's deadline of September 1996 (voluntary 'Article 13 agreements'), an agreemement to be concluded by a 'special negotiating body' (SNB) process that could be triggered unilaterally by employees or management after that date ('Article 6 agreements') and standard 'subsidiary requirements' to be applied detailing the EWC's constitution, rights and issues to be dealt with, in cases when negotiations fail for a number of reasons. Referring to these three possible scenarios, Cressey (1998:69) notes that under pressure from the European employers' peak organisation UNICE the European Commission has explicitly expressed its preference and encouragement for companies to conclude voluntary EWC agreements and regards the use of 'the formal machinery as a last resort'. This inbred flexibility and possibility for customization in the implementation methods forms a part of the EWCs advantages that companies' management can make use of and these, alongside with the potential disadvantages will be explored in greater detail below.
Before moving on to describe some of the advantages that EWCs present to employers and the disadvantages they might pose, it is important to include a word of caution. A true picture of the actual benefits a council provides and the costs it incurs might be difficult to reveal because, as Hall and Marginson rightly point out EWCs 'remain relatively youthful structures which are taking both management and employee representatives into uncharted territory' (2005: 17-18) and accounts of potential opportunities and threats tend to prevail over analyses of real ones that have already materialized. This notion is supported by the point M
Another factor that might prevent an accurate description of the benefits and shortcomings of EWCs to employers arises from the possibility of conclusions and generalizations being formed on the basis of research methods allowing for socially desirable answers and bias in presenting information. Using only data collected through survey instruments or failing to recognize that management opinions on benefits might be one-sided and uncritical could prove to be an obstacle to a true analysis (see also M
Nevertheless, this essay will draw on accounts that refer to different methods of data collection, as mentioned above and will acknowledge the fact that generalizations could be made only in the researched context. It will present a picture of some of the advantages and disadvantages that EWCs pose to managers of companies where such councils are in place, and while it does not claim to be exhaustive, it will nevertheless attempt to provide an overview based on varied sources.
Reviewing evidence from several examinations of managerial views, this essay has attempted to enlist some of the potential and actual (as perceived by employers) advantages and disadvantages of EWCs. Improving communication at various levels within the group, supporting corporate governance, preserving managerial decision-making prerogative and flexibility in implementation are among the gains for employers, while drawbacks like higher expenditure, aggravated bureaucracy, raised employee expectations and fostering of European-level collective bargaining look either relatively unsubstantial or somehow far-fetched. It would seem that despite some initial uneasiness, employers have found more opportunities in the operation of consultative bodies at European level than threats. Nakano reinforces that in summarizing that 'despite initial hostility towards the new system, many employers have found it in practice less threatening than anticipated, and some have been more positively enthusiastic' (1999:312-313) (also Hall and Marginson 2005). The reciprocal action between the different agendas and expectations unionists and employers have with regard to EWCs has increasingly meant that 'Europeanization of industrial relations is taking place primarily on management's terms' (Hanck This is not to say the EWCs do not have their advantages (and disadvantages) for employees and their representatives as well, only that currently employers have managed to utilize the advantages presented to them better than employees - as Weston and Martinez Lucio put it '[for now] the EWC directive is being seen more as a managerial tool to consolidate their strategies of control over labour, rather than effective tool for the trade unions to influence the employment relation for more positive outcome'. (1998:556) (also Royle 1999). Clearly, employers in MNCs have acknowledged the advantages and disadvantages European consultative bodies might offer them and have managed to turn the opportunities into benefits. At the same time, shortcomings are regarded as less prominent as most of the potential threats EWCs pose have not actually materialized.