In the last decade, managers have witnessed a revolution in technology and supply chains. A variety of shocks occurring throughout markets have radically changed the way managers view their environments. The rate of change in markets, products, technology, and competitors is rapidly increasing, leading to a situation in which managers must make decisions on shorter notice with less information, and with higher penalty costs. Despite the apparent impossibility of surviving under such environment conditions, some organizations are thriving, Super Soap is an example. As Super Soap strives to increase customer value by improving performance while simultaneously reducing costs, one area that attracting its attention is procurement and outsourcing management. In this essay, we will discuss them in details. It is divided in two parts. The first part is talking about the organisational structures of procurement department, function of centralized procurement organisation and the outsourced issues. The second part will analysis three cost saving measures, which are volume concentration, best price evaluation and global sourcing.
Purchasing is presented in this book as a pro-active function involved in the management of the input to the organization, and as a key element in all business in which purchase costs are a significant proportion of total revenue or budget[1].
A major responsibility of purchasing is to ensure that the price paid for an item is fair and reasonable. Evaluation of a supplier's cost versus the actual price paid is an ongoing challenge within many industries. The need to control costs requires that a buyer focus on the costs associated with producing an item or service, versus simply analyzing final price. In fact, innovative pricing approaches involve cost identification as a process leading to buyer-seller agreement on a final price.
The measures in this category focus attention on efforts to reduce purchase costs. Cost measures fall into three general categories: cost reduction, cost avoidance, and return-on-investment (ROI based on cost reductions obtained).
The use of cost measures requires a word of caution. The method used to achieve cost reductions is critical. A cost reduction based on mutual cooperation is the same, on paper, as a cost reduction resulting from heavy-handed pressure on a supplier. While the end result (i.e. a cost reduction) appears to be the same, the process used to achieve that result can have longer-term implications. Cooperation may reduce costs through joint improvement while heavy-handed cost pressure might force a supplier to cut corners, resulting in poor quality.
A cost saving measure compares the actual cost of an item or family of items over a period of time. A cost reduction is a decrease in cost resulting from a change in purchasing practice brought about by individual or group effort aimed at achieving such a decrease.
In the following paragraphs, we will discuss about three cost saving methods: globing sourcing, product specification improvement and best price evaluation.