The following report consists of an experiment carried out in the laboratory to find the moment of inertia of three given disks of different sizes. This was done by using different masses and by calculating the time taken by each mass to reach the table. All the readings were tabulated and graphs were plotted. The moment of inertia was calculated using the gradient of the graph. Since most of the points on the graph were going through the best fit line we can say that the value obtained for inertia is quite accurate. And since necessary precautions were taken while carrying out the experiment such as to repeat the experiment to minimize human error would have resulted in getting very accurate reading for the inertia.
Newton's First Law of motion states that "An object at rest tends to stay at rest and an object in motion tends to stay in motion with the same speed and in the same direction unless acted upon by an unbalanced force." It is normal for an object to resist its change in motion. This tendency to resist changes in their state of motion is described as inertia. The lab was carried out to further analyze and understand inertia.
The aim of the experiment was to investigate the moment of inertia of three metals disks of different sizes which had the same axis of rotation. The experiment was carried out in the laboratory in groups of two. Where the time taken by a given weight to travel a specific distance was noted for the three metal discs provided. Multiple readings were taken when doing the experiment to make the obtained values more accurate. Having two members in the group helped out with taking readings and setting up the apparatus and doing many other different tasks simultaneously. The average time taken was calculated and graphs were drawn which made the final value for the moment of inertia accurate. The theory used is illustrated below.
The following theories were used to do the calculations carries out and the readings that were taken.
Since the left hand side is the same in both the equations
The value of The table below shows the values used to plot the graph. A graph of 'm' versus
It is also recommended as a second method to pick out the minimum and maximum value of the four readings obtained by repeating the experiment. (Finding out how long the mass takes to travel from the centre of the metal rod until it comes in contact with the table), Then calculating the value of Then by comparing the minimum and maxim graphs we can interpret the results for the inertia.
Since the experiment was carried out by a group all precautions were taken to make sure that the apparatus was set up in the most precise and accurate manner. Tabulations and readings were taken very carefully so as not to jeopardize the accuracy of the experiment.
Since almost all the points plotted are on the best fit line. And the experiment was repeated and the necessary precautions were taken, we can say that the calculated value of the moment of inertia is accurate.