The aim of the project was to determine whether a shape alternative to squares could provide a better quality image at low resolution. This was investigated by simulating pixel shapes using the OpenGL graphics software. In a direct comparison between square pixel and hexagon pixel images, square pixel images were preferred 60% of the time compared with hexagon pixel images being preferred 28% of the time. However hexagon pixel images were using between 14.29% - 14.78% less samples than the square pixel images and were therefore at a disadvantage.
For the best possible approach to the project it was important to gain an understanding of the issues involved with displaying images and also the different features of different shapes.
The design section discussed the equipment chosen for investigating pixel shape followed by some of the design ideas for the software and experiments.
The implementation of the design formed a major part of the project. Techniques for displaying images were tested and integrated into the main code. The methods used for forming and displaying the polygons are discussed.
The actual data from the preliminary results were not the key aspect. The experience gained from running the experiment ensured a more accurate and reliable final experiment. The final experiment compared hexagon, square and circular pixels, the results of which are discussed in the following sections.
The project aim was to investigate the effects of pixel shape on images at low resolution. Changing the pixel shape had many different effects - using hexagons provided more detail but was poor for edges; using circles applied a smoothing effect and blurred the image but the overall brightness of an image was decreased. Hexagon pixel images were preferred over circle pixel images however square pixel images were preferred over both hexagon and circle pixel images. This was mainly due to the straight edges provided by the square pixels. However images displayed using hexagonal sampling grids were using roughly 14% less samples than when using the square sampling grid - therefore images were being displayed with less information content.
The project could still be further developed by investigating different pixel shapes when the number of samples in either square sampled or hexagonally sampled images were the same. Ultimately it would be desirable to test hexagonal images on hardware that was capable of using hexagonal pixels. This would remove the simulation effects and be a true test. The experiments could be performed by a psychologist to ensure the tests were fair. The secondary objective of the project was never achieved and hence could still be investigated further.
The main project aim was achieved - the effect of pixel shape on images was investigated. However the solution to the problems discussed at the beginning of the report were not attained. The secondary objective was not accomplished due to lack of understanding of the OpenGL graphics language.