An experiment was carried out to gain more knowledge of:
This was achieved by setting up a circuit which had resistance and inductance connected in series. The circuit contained a Variac (trade name) which allowed for changes to the number of turns of the coil.
Increase in the number of turns caused increase in inductance. This caused the current to go out of phase with voltage. This lowered the current and also lowered the power factor giving a lower total power.
Harmonics present on the ac mains were seen from the waveforms because there were peaks in multiples of 50. This meant that the waves were not completely sinusoidal but were close to it. Harmonics were difficult to read after the 5 th harmonic because inductors act as low-pass filters meaning it filters out the higher frequencies.
To counteract the effects of the inductor a capacitor could be added to the circuit to bring the current back into phase with the voltage. This would give a higher total power output.
The graphs and waveforms can be viewed in the graph section in the appendix.
The purpose of this experiment was to develop understanding of:
Constructing a circuit that contained resistance and inductance in series carried this out. The ac mains were used as the voltage supply. The mains were connected through a variable autotransformer (known as a 'Variac' - trade name) and an isolating transformer. The Variac provided a way of controlling alternating voltage and the isolating transformer ensures safety.
The main part of the circuit consisted of a coil from the motor of a food mixer. The coil was wound on a magnetic core. The coil and part of the core were placed within the test box. The rest of the core sat on top of the box. To limit the current a fixed resistor of 350 was placed in series with the coil.
An inductor consists of a coil of wire wrapped around a magnetic core. When current is passed through this coil there is a delay in the release of the charge. This causes storage of charge within the coil. This makes an inductor a storage element for charge. However placing an inductor in series with a resistor causes the current to lags in relation to the voltage. To oppose this problem placing a capacitor in parallel with the inductor will put the current back in phase with the voltage. A current-carrying coil with N-turns, length l, and cross-sectional area A wound on a ferromagnetic core, would have a voltage given by,
Whereii is the current and L is the inductance (Henry's)
It can be seen that inductance has a relation to current.
The relationship between the inductance (L) and the number of turns (N) is:
Taking logarithms gives log 10
k + log 10
N. In a single layered coil  = 2, however in multi-layer coils  is slightly different from this value.
Inductors can act as low-pass filters. This means that they only let through wavelengths of a lower frequency.
Harmonics can be present in circuits. Harmonics is the distortion of wavelengths and frequency. In a normal circuit the current waveform is sinusoidal, however this can be changed due to the addition of other electrical components, hence causing harmonics in the system.
For more theory read the appendices of the briefing sheet included in this report.
Variable autotransformer 0 - 275 ac (Variac, Regavolt, or equivalent)
Isolating transformer with connecting leads
Test box with inductor and switch to select number of turns (Fig 1 of briefing sheet)
Digital Storage Oscilloscope (Tektronix TDS 210)
Digital Wattmeter (Elcontrol Nanovip Plus)
2 connecting leads (BNC to BNC) for oscilloscope
3 connecting leads (4mm to 4mm) for circuit)
Shared access to Printer (HP DeskJet 930C)
This table shows how the voltage, current, power and power factor changed in relation to number of turns.
The hard copies of the waveforms produced can be found in the graph section. The main results of the waveforms can be found here:
The raw data for the graph of log10 Inductance against log10 N turns.
The method of calculation for this data can be found in the appendices of the briefing sheet included with this report.
was found from the gradient of the graph to be 1.915.
The first set of data displayed in Table 1 shows that as the number of turns go up there is a decrease in current, power and power factor. The voltage stays fairly constant. Power is related to current so a decrease in current means a decrease in power. The power factor is the cosine of the phase angle between voltage and current. Looking at figure 1 in the graph section it is shown that as the number of turns increased the inductance of the system also increased. An increase in inductance gives an increase in phase angle. This is shown because the power factor goes down as inductance increases.
Increasing the inductance causes a decrease in current, power and power factor.
The peak voltage obtained from the oscilloscope was 27.2V. However this was not in r.m.s voltage. The peak voltage had to be divided by 2 to obtain the r.m.s voltage. The r.m.s voltage calculated from the waveform was 19.23V. This was quite close to the wattmeter reading of 20.2V. (Figure 2 graph section)
The peak current obtained from the oscilloscope was 58.0mA. The r.m.s value was calculated by dividing the peak current by 2. The r.m.s current was 41mA. This again was close to the wattmeter reading of 38.1mA.
The power factor calculated from the waveform was 0.71. This does not differ much from the wattmeter reading of 0.61. (Figure 3 graph section)
By changing the settings of the oscilloscope to produce in results in dB the magnitude of the waveforms were emphasised rather than the shape. The oscilloscope showed a voltage magnitude of 25.0dB. A voltage magnitude calculated from the waveform data (20log 10 19.23V) gave a magnitude of 25.68dB which was very close to the oscilloscope value. (Figure 4 graph section)
The oscilloscope showed a current magnitude - 29.0dB. The current magnitude calculated from the waveform data (20log 10 41mA) gave a magnitude of - 27.74dB which was again close to the oscilloscope value. (Figure 5 graph section)
The harmonics of the circuit had a period of 50Hz but were difficult to read after the 5 th harmonic. The inductor acted as low-pass filter and filtered out the higher harmonics.
Increasing the number of turns on an inductor increased the inductance of the system. This in turn increased the phase angle between the current and voltage causing the current to lag further and further behind the voltage. This caused the current in the circuit to decrease. The decrease in current caused a decrease in power. Because the phase angle increases as inductance increases the power factor decreased.
Harmonics were present in the system and had a period of 50Hz. They were filtered out after the 5 th harmonic because inductors act as low-pass filters.