The report investigated the past performance of Kidde plc as well as the reliability of its annual report in the year 2003. It also considered the potential future of Kidde plc's performance.
The results were
Kidde plc has had increased profitability and efficiency ratios.
Kidde plc has strengthened its market position and has had good results for investors.
The Kidde plc Annual Report and Accounts 2003 was deemed reliable.
It was recommended that shareholders increase their shares in Kidde plc.
Kidde plc has a promising future due to their strategy of concentrating on core business and using infill acquisitions.
The recent takeover by UTC (United Technologies Corporation) will have great benefit for Kidde plc in America.
Kidde plc is an independent fire protection business. They also have divisions providing aerospace and specialist equipment as well as some business in the residential and commercial sectors. This report will evaluate the past performance of Kidde plc by use of horizontal and ratio analysis. By considering the reliability of the Kidde plc Annual Report and Accounts 2003 alongside the past performance this report will recommend to shareholders whether to hold, sell or buy shares in Kidde plc. Finally the report will discuss the potential future of Kidde plc. All figures are taken from the Kidde-best file unless otherwise stated
The past performance will be considered by first horizontal analysis on the profit followed by relevant profitability, efficiency, investment and liquidity ratios.
The Kidde plc Annual Report and Accounts 2003 seem quite reliable. There is a lot of information provided about how the business is run. In the corporate governance statement there are details on measures taken to produce accounts which represent a true and fair view of the financial status of the company. The report is helpful in allowing the reader to make better comparisons with previous years reports. According to the Group Finance Directors report in 2003 Kidde plc changed their number of operating divisions from four to three This could cause problems when trying to compare to previous years. However in this report they have included figures in the four division format especially to allow for comparisons. They have also converted the old 2002 figures to a three divisional format again to allow for ease of comparison. A report which provides such useful comparison methods must have something good to show otherwise if there was something to cover up the reports would not contain easy comparison.
As with any set of accounts adjustments have been made. These adjustments seem quite appropriate. For example in section 13 of notes to the accounts depreciation has been applied to tangible fixed assets The technique used was a straight line basis which is a valid depreciation method. Freehold land has not been depreciated which is also valid with normal accounting practice. The only slightly worrying figure is here is that some plant, equipment, or vehicle has a depreciation rate of 33.3% which seems a bit high. Either Kidde plc should invest in longer lasting assets or someone is taking liberties with the accounts. Apart from this the depreciation adjustments are reliable.
Another accounting adjustment was made to the stocks. On page 26 of the annual report it states that 'stocks are valued at the lower of cost and net realisable value' The Inland Revenue website states 'One of the acceptable basis of stock valuation is the lower of cost and net realisable value' According to the report 'cost is calculated on an average or 'first in, first out' basis.' Both of these methods are valid however it may have been more useful if they stated what costs were calculated via a particular method. When making accounting adjustments Kidde plc have used well known adjustment methods for providing a true and fair view of the accounts. Inspecting the figures themselves there seems to be no discrepancies. Kidde plc has made reliable accounting adjustments.
It is important to note that the PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP have audited the accounts and found that 'the financial statements give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Company and the Group at 31 December 2003...' Ernst & Young, a separate accountancy firm, worked with Kidde plc to make better financial decisions It is clear that the auditors were completely independent from any other interaction with Kidde plc.
There is a slightly puzzling figure in section 5 of the accounts when mentioning the disposal of fixed assets. Kidde plc made a However Baxi, an associated company of Kidde plc managed to make a These values match up all too conveniently and perhaps further investigation could be made. However it is noted in the exceptional items section which would suggest it is a one-off and would not be happening too frequently.
Apart from this the Kidde plc annual report and accounts 2003 can be deemed reliable, and represent and a true and fair view of the financial health of the company.
As stated in the conclusion to the performance section Kidde plc is a successful business. The growth rate has not been too explosive suggesting there is more growth yet to come. Kidde plc has a good relationship with investors, a strengthening market position and reputation and has a promising business strategy. For these reasons and those suggested in the conclusion of section 2 I would recommend buying more shares in Kidde plc.
Kidde plc is a growing business. Every year it is implementing new strategies that help the business to thrive. The approach employed in 2004 was to concentrate on core business while still gaining extra income from acquisitions Early in 2004 Kidde plc sold their shares in associated companies Baxi and Robbialac In the previous report Baxi and Robbialac were regarded as non-core activities Kidde plc also sold their investment in professional paint. These sales provided a small, one-off income for the business at the cost of losing the steady income obtained by acquisitions. To overcome this Kidde plc made new acquisitions of Harden SA, a provider of fire equipment and services This strategy is very beneficial to the company these acquisitions relate more directly to core activities. Interaction with the acquired companies may assist in research and development and providing new services or products.
In 2004 UTC (United Technologies Corporation), an American company, made bids to buy out Kidde plc. The BBC website stated that Kidde saw its share price rise by 20% ... after it confirmed it had rejected a It also mentioned that Kidde plc stated that 160p per share was materially understating the company On the website analysts suggested that Kidde plc could have sold each share for 170p. However in the end Kidde plc was bought for 165p per share. If this is the case then why did Kidde plc sell out so low? Perhaps Kidde plc has some unknown difficulty that could have emerged as a real problem if they had not been bought out soon.
Generally the takeover by UTC will generate more shareholder interest in Kidde plc and also cause share price to rise. Being bought out by an American company will also allow Kidde plc to get even more presence in America, in which some of Kidde plc's operations are based. The takeover will also please shareholders because there part of the deal included a 2p per share special interim dividend It is also possible for UTC's rivals Fairfield and Honeywell to make higher bids which would only be more beneficial for Kidde plc If UTC does win the bid Kidde plc will be reunited with Chubb plc who were bought out by UTC earlier. Kidde plc and Chubb plc were together as part of Williams plc and as shown in the ratios in the previous sections they enjoyed much success. However there were problems at that time which is what caused the demerger in 2000. Now Kidde plc have reorganised their structure and are in a better efficiency and management situation. By rejoining Chubb plc under new terms they may be able to achieve more accomplishments than before.
According to the interim report Kidde plc have been making good progress in the first half of 2004 securing important fire protection contracts on the Boeing 7E7 Dreamliner In all divisions Kidde plc has generated higher divisional profits than in the previous year. It has been a strong first half and on reading the interim report it would suggest that the rest of the year will be just as strong.
In general Kidde plc is a business which has a determined strategy which will help generate revenue while still allowing strong development of products and services. They have new prospects in America and by concentrating on their core business they will be successful for more years to come.