The purpose of this laboratory was to analyse data produced from an experiment using MATLAB. The experiment investigated the lateral and longitudinal forces on road tyres when in the process of cornering. The data obtained included lateral force, longitudinal force, slip angle and slip ratio.
The method of the laboratory involved typing simple commands into MATLAB. The commands were used for a variety of functions, from loading the data to plotting graphs from it.
In the laboratory MATLAB was used to analyse these results and produce suitable visualisation of the data produced. At first MATLAB was commanded to produce graphs using the method of least squares as if with one polynomial. This produced an inaccurate graph as the data clearly had a curve and the graph produced had a straight line. This method was refined and a more complicated method was produced. This involved calculating new variables using MATLAB commands. However this produced a line of best fit which fit well through all the points. Using MATLAB the data from the experiment was visualised suitably. The data could now be analysed easily.
An experiment was carried out investigating the lateral force, Fy, and longitudinal force, Fx, acting on a road tyre when it is cornering. The tyre had a translational velocity of v, which had two components, longitudinal component vx and lateral component vy. The tyre also had a rotational velocity of . The tyre was subjected to a load F z, which was 500kg i.e. 4900N. The slip angle was given by
The slip ratio was given by
2.
The data obtained for this experiment is in appendix 2. This data had to be processed so that it would be easier for patterns to be discovered and arguments and conclusions to be formed. This data was processed using MATLAB. MATLAB had a range of functions which, allowed for easy manipulation of data. For example MATLAB can plot points on a graph and draw the line of best fit.
The purpose of this laboratory was to use MATLAB to analyse the data and present the results in a way that was easy to understand.
The data in MATLAB was analysed using various forms of regression. In the first few exercises the method of least squares was used to find linear lines of best fit. In this method the model y = a + bx, is chosen to be the line of best fit. However once it passes certain points there will a degree of error, since the line of best fit does not follow points individually but follows the overall pattern of the points. The method of least squares chooses estimates for the values a and b, which minimises the sum of the squared error. To find a' and b', the estimates, the following equations are used,
and
Solving these simultaneous equations gives the values to be used for a and b. The line of best fit can then be plotted.
For non-linear regression the model used is y = axb and the data can be converted to a form which fits this model.
The apparatus used to analyse this data was the software package MATLAB.
The graphs for the data can be viewed in appendix 1.
Graph 1 produced a graph for lateral force data. This was plotted with only the points displayed. The graph showed a linear pattern up to angle 2.5 degrees after which point it was non linear. This meant that when the tyre is cornering after it turns more than 2.5 degrees the lateral force on the tyre increases in a non linear fashion. Graph 3 highlights the linear part of the data. During this stage as the slip angle increases the lateral forces also increase at the same rate. When the cornering stiffness was increased the gradient of the linear line also increased. When the cornering stiffness decreased the gradient part of the linear line also decreased. This shows that the cornering stiffness is directly related to the gradient of the linear line. But once the slip angle is greater than 2.5 degrees the cornering stiffness has a different effect. In graph 5 it can be seen that the line follows the points closely. Overall it can be seen from the graph that once the slip angle gets higher than 2.5 degrees the lateral force does not increase much. It can also be shown that there is a limit to the lateral force on a tyre of around 4400 N. If required to find the lateral force at a particular slip angle it can be easily read from the graph. The data is now in a suitable format for analysis and pattern recognition.
Graph 2 produced a graph for longitudinal data. This was plotted with only the points displayed. The graph shows a linear pattern up to the slip ratio of 0.03 after which point it was non linear. Graph 4 highlights the linear part of the data. During this stage as the slip ratio increases the longitudinal force on the tyre also increases at the same rate. When the longitudinal stiffness was increased the gradient of the linear line also increased. When the longitudinal stiffness was decreased the gradient of the liner line also decreased. This shows that the longitudinal stiffness is directly related to the gradient of the linear line. But once the slip ratio is greater than 0.03 the longitudinal stiffness has a different effect. In graph 6 it can be seen that the line closely follows the points. Overall it can be seen from the graph that once the slip ratio becomes higher than 0.03 the longitudinal force does not increase much. It can also be shown that there is a limit to the longitudinal force on a tyre of about 4500N. If required to find the longitudinal force at a particular slip ratio it can be easily read from the graph. The data is now in a suitable format for analysis and pattern recognition.
Using MATLAB graphs have been produced from the data. These graphs are of high accuracy and use standard methods of regression well. They can be used to find patterns and for any other reasons graphs may be needed. Using MATLAB was an easy process. However a drawback to using MATLAB is that you should know how to use all its functions, or at least the functions needed, in order to gain the most from it.
Analysing the data was using MATLAB was a fairly simple process. The commands were easy to input producing graphs of high standard. MATLAB uses proven techniques, such as regression, to produce graphs of high accuracy. MATLAB is a useful tool for data analysis and visualisation.