Modernism is surely the most indefinable movement of the twentieth century. As critics have remarked, it is a concept which 'incorporates major contradictions'. However, a key factor in our understanding of modernism is an awareness of the socio-political, cultural and scientific context of its conception. If we are to define it as a movement which, as Peter Childs argues, was 'primarily located in the years 1890-1930', Indeed, death contributed greatly to this birth. According to one website, '1,773,000' soldiers died and '11,000,000 mobilized' and '4,216,000 injured' More positively, the 1919 National Constitutional Assembly elections Moreover, female emancipation occurred not only in political and professional realms, but also in the sphere of sexual relationships. The creation of 'die neue Frau' was influenced by the 'free sexuality' encouraged by the Berlin and Munich cabaret scenes; in addition, the arrival of sexual health clinics meant that women were no longer confined to the roles of housewife and mother imposed on them by the former Imperial state. In contrast to the artistically dubious cabaret, several creative movements, some essentially part of Modernism, others in conflict with it, formed throughout Europe in the early twentieth century. In Germany, one can note the concept of the 'socially critical'
If, as Peter Childs declares, 'Modernism can be taken as a response by artists and writers to several things, including industrialisation, urban society, war, technological change and new philosophical ideas', Certainly, while it is set in the year 2000, it is the developments of the late nineteenth, and early twentieth, century which Lang exhibits in our first glimpses of the city Metropolis. Clearly, its planes, trains and automobiles reflect the urbanised, heavily populated London, Paris, or Berlin at the turn of the century, and its skyscrapers, due to America's influence on the Bauhaus artists, suggest more than a little nod to those of the modern New York. This first overview of Metropolis, then, suggests the positive side of man's progress in technology. As the skyscrapers and planes symbolically indicate, and which one critic has pointed out, man is literally reaching for the skies. A closer look at this Indeed, man is present in this scene, but purely either to have his individuality suppressed by being part of one of those 'formal geometrical structures', Clearly, we must possess double vision when watching Forster's belief in the tyranny of the machine Thus, the triumphant soundtrack to this scene, if not ironic insofar as it declares man's progress in technology, nonetheless belies the catastrophe which awaits man as a result of this progress.
If Modernist art criticises the tyranny of the machine, then it criticises society also for permitting this tyranny. Lang encourages the afore-mentioned double vision of the viewer by depicting firstly the lowest class in Their black attire, squadron-esque formations and bowed heads support one critic's argument that they are 'more machines than human beings', Evidently, they exist purely to work and are literally mere cogs in the machine, empowering with 'every revolution of a machine wheel', The social divide between the working class and the upper class is emphasised in several ways. Firstly, as one critic has suggested, 'architecture in Lang expresses [....] the hierarchy of classes', It is an inferiority nonetheless beautifully emphasised by the descending, altar poem-esque intertitle, 'Deep below the earth's surface lay the workers' city'. Lastly, the physicality of these sportsmen, highlighted by their wearing white, is enjoyed not only in sport of a competitive, but also of a sexual, nature, supported by Freder's frolicking with a half-naked woman in an Eden-esque garden. This is in clear contrast to the workers, whose sexual exploits are evidently limited to procreation, as we see no women in their lives until anarchy has broken out.
Certainly then, Its 'reactionary and humanist resolution' As Lang himself remarked more than thirty years after the film was made,
Conversely, as one critic has noted, 'the purpose of art for Marx and Marxists was not to reflect social conditions but to attempt to change them', However, Marx's view that, in the wake of industrialisation and its effect on the class system, the true progress of mankind could be measured only by his endeavour to destroy the social hierarchy he has created, seems to correspond to Where it differs is in Although the workers revolt against the machines which keep them firmly in the working class, 'capitulation rather than resolution', Furthermore, the crucial word in the quote above is 'attempt'. Lang However, Gunning's view of
Clearly, Marxism espoused Modernism, and However, if one views Modernism as what Lang himself called 'pessimism for its own sake',
An analysis of the Modernist mentality in the context of Both films explore the Modernist thinker Freud's idea that the male fears castration at the hands of the female. Stephen Jenkins testifies to this in relation to
This fear of castration is evidently genetic, as it is experienced not only by Fredersen, but also by Freder. While many critics have analysed his work on the 'Clock Machine' in religious, allegorical terms, reading it in terms of his representation of Jesus and therefore seeing it as a crucifixion, equally, particularly considering the common view that technology is feminised is In contrast, Rotwang's threatening pursuit of Maria, in which he stuns her with her flashlight, symbolically depicts the male enacting his revenge on the supposedly castrating female
In contrast to While one could argue that the sexual objectification of Lola Lola ultimately exploits rather than empowers her, one cannot argue with the finality of the denouement, spotlighting the dead Rath whom she has truly vanquished. Her conquering, and thus castrating, him, is decided moments after he has entered the Blauer Engel. Literally turning the spotlight on him from the superior position of the stage, she simultaneously seduces him and discomforts him. Perhaps her most obvious parade of her phallic superiority is in her exhibition of her legs, constantly hugging them close to her, pulling stockings onto them and, in the scene where she drops her cigarettes and Rath rushes to pick them up, causing him to come literally face to face with them. A more subtle symptom of Rath's castration, however, is symbolised by his leaving his hat, a traditional piece of masculine attire and representation of the phallus, in her dressing room. Later, we see her donning a top hat, Rath's castration and her epitomising the modern concept of 'die neue Frau', who refused to conform to gender stereotypes in Weimar Germany, thus simultaneously completed.
Not only Freud's concept of male castration fear, but also his interlinking theory of the Oedipus complex, features in He experiences a gradual regression back to childhood, in contrast to Freder, who alternates between the role of regressor and that of mature mediator in Furthermore, whereas Freder's view of Maria as mother is inevitably intertwined with the anti-Modernist, religiously allegorical idea of their being Jesus and Virgin Mary figures respectively, Rath's regression has an inverse relationship to Lola Lola's Modernist progression to stardom and sexual freedom. While Maria inherits the features of the modern Virgin Mary in order to facilitate the suppression of the female, once the robot has been destroyed, at As one critic has said, 'she wears the signs and insignia of a phallic mother'. His Oedipus complex and subsequent downfall is hinted at in his teaching of Indeed, it is the recurrence of these pupils in Lola Lola's dressing room, particularly when they are hiding under the trap door, which represents his unsuccessful attempt to suppress his inner child who both desires the mother figure and fears his castration at her hands. Understandably, for Lola Lola takes the idea of 'die neue Frau' to the extreme, marrying him only to make him her servant, not only defying his wish that postcards of her should no longer be sold, for they encourage other men to possess her, but also making him sell them to these men at the Blauer Engel.
If As one critic has noted, modernist film reveals 'the voyeuristic position of the film spectator', The spectator views Rath and his pupils lusting over the postcards of Lola Lola and, simultaneously, finds himself or herself lusting over Dietrich the star. Fittingly, however, it is at the Blauer Engel that this cult of voyeurism reaches its climax. Rath tries to take his eyes off Lola Lola in her dressing room, but succumbs, like the spectator, to watching her undress. Ironically, the screen, which should hide her body while she changes, only draws both Rath and the spectator to glance at it all the more. As one critic has noted,
Just as Dietrich self-consciously creates the cult of the star in her portrayal of Lola Lola, Lang embraces the Modernist concept of 'technical display' Indeed, the UFA studio, at that time the biggest in Europe, For Lang's vision not only showcased the planes, trains and automobiles, in the scene depicting Metropolis the city, which had been relatively recently invented in the world outside the studio, but also used the film to showcase the technological progress made by his production team within the studio. The Schuefften process, which 'used a camera with two lenses [....] [and] focused two separate images onto a single strip of film',
However, these revolutionary effects, despite their suggesting a Modernist tendency to 'technical display', are frequently used in Freder's second hallucination exemplifies one critic's definition of Expressionist cinema as involving 'melodramatic acting', 'a subjective experience of time' and 'a vividness or intensity of sensory perception'. Yet the sheer 'vividness' of this vision and Freder's feeling that time has accelerated create an Expressionist mood which is enhanced, nonetheless, by the 'avant-garde editing figure [of] the jump cut'
Indeed, since this essay has attempted to emphasise the Modernist's concentration on mankind's technical progress, it would be useful, in the context of The ambiguity of Langian Modernism is reflected in the 'duality' of his characters, a duality which, in turn, is epitomised by the figure of Rotwang. In several ways, Rotwang is essentially a Modernist character. Like those who use their powers of invention to create ammunition only in order to destroy mankind, Rotwang's creation of the robot Maria may illustrate technological progression, but it highlights also, more importantly, the 'deathly magic in the creative impulse' Conversely, as one critic has argued, 'the visual portrayal of his surroundings marks Rotwang as a medieval wizard, a trafficker in spirits and demons'. Clearly, then, the character of Rotwang espouses a contradictory 'gothic modernism'.
If Modernist Cinema 'questions Despite the developments during However, this apparent technological deficiency is counteracted not only by the film's soundtrack, but also in its clever use of illumination. As one critic concurs, 'Light can even create the impression of sound', Likewise, the instances of apparently incidental sound in Thus, Rath's constant nose blowing is symptomatic of his desire literally to unblock his sexually repressive nature. His opening the window in the classroom at the beginning of the film lets in the joyous sound of female singing, thus, once again, confirming his desire to reawaken his sexual appetite. Conversely, his closing the window almost straightaway foreshadows his initial fear at the Blauer Engel of the sexual colossus who is Lola Lola, a fear which she herself will confirm when, dressing, she strikes a discordant note on the piano.
In conclusion, to a certain extent, neither Both films owe a debt to Expressionism in their use of distorted sets and chiaroscuro lighting; a considerable amount of On the whole, however, several elements of these films force us to define them as Modernist. The influence of modern thinkers such as Freud is apparent in both films' explorations of the psychoanalytic concepts of the Oedipus complex and castration fear. In turn, despite their identities as a silent film and an early 'Tonfilm' respectively, Regarding individual merit, it is clear that But it is in turning to In superficial terms, its mere depiction of man's technological endeavours class it as Modernist. Probing deeper, however, it is in the representation of both positive and negative views of technology, as well as the parallel desire to enact social change in spite of the tyranny of the machine, and yet pessimistically accepting that social change is often superficial, which classifies