The whole of Oscar Wilde's writing, like the man himself, is a contradiction. John Sloan, calls England Wilde's 'mother country' And yet, Wilde spent much of his life in homage to that well-known Anglo-Irish villain, Count Dracula. Like the Count, whose knowledge of English geography surpasses that of his English guest's In investigating this influence, I will examine to what extent Wilde approaches Ireland, whether directly or obliquely, in the following essay.
It is not surprising that Wilde is considered to be one of the greatest His transformation into a dandy at Oxford, along with his promotion as a typical English aristocrat by the tourist industry, have helped to sustain this myth. Moreover, there are only two direct references to Wilde's country of birth in Mrs Cheveley, in tells the reader that he has been discussing 'Macpherson, Ireland, and Chatterton' Yet many critics have recognised that, despite the lack of direct references to Wilde's native country, Ireland is a dominant albeit subtle theme throughout Wilde's work. This is most apparent in Wilde's indirect treatment of Anglo-Irish relations. The Great Famine took place just before Wilde was born It was the 'English insular unawareness of the realities of Irish life' However, in some writings, Wilde used no such pose and focused on specifically Irish themes, which one critic has described as 'anarchy and socialism, poverty and privilege, feminism and gender [and] imperialism' The theme of 'poverty' is especially apparent in the abundance of famine imagery throughout his work. Sloan mentions only one portrayal of famine in Wilde's work, saying that 'The terrifying vision of the famine in 'The Young King'... is seen to allude to Ireland during the Great Hunger' However, there are several other veiled references to this key event in Irish history. As Brecht's Indeed, in revolutionary literature, the country for whose fight for freedom on is documenting is often referred to as 'Mother' (witness Brecht, again, in his poem, Michael, one of the Nihilist revolutionaries, says, in a Russia is once again referred to as 'mother' Nonetheless, the implied image of Ireland as the sacrificial, selfless, mother reaches its peak when Vera apostrophises Russia twice within a few lines, exclaiming, 'O crucified mother' In equating Ireland with Christ's crucifixion, Wilde elevates his native country's history, suggesting that future generations will prosper due to past sacrifices. This is supported by O' Donoghue's view that 'sacrifice as an idea pervades the Irish cultural tradition'
These religious allusions to the suffering of the poor continue in Wilde's story, Concentrating on the eponymous character's struggle with his place in society, the theme of famine is portrayed much more literally here in his biblical-inspired dreams. In the vein of Joseph, the King dreams of 'faces pinched with famine' Here is where Wilde's fine motif of greedy appetites in the upper classes, representative of capitalist England's avarice and particularly prevalent in the society plays, has its roots. In a telling example of dramatic irony, one of the workers describes the King to the King himself without knowing it.
Wilde's portrayal of the literal greed of the English reaches its apex in The character of Algy is obsessed with eating to the extent that he has a rather farcical argument with Jack about muffins, causing the latter to say to him, 'How can you sit there, calmly eating muffins when we are in this horrible trouble, I can't make out. You seem to me to be perfectly heartless." Many of the conversations and friendships in the play, as well as in This foreshadows Wilde's depiction of Lord Alfred Douglas, in
On a more symbolic note, Wilde's medieval-style personification of Death and Avarice in Both emigration and an increased mortality rate dramatically reduced the Irish population, and the 'socially disgusting'
The phenomenon of the Big House and English absenteeism from Ireland plays a large part in Wilde's writing. Introduced in the latter half of the nineteenth century, Gladstone's Land Acts were largely inadequate, and this is reflected best of all in two of Wilde's stories, In the latter, an ideal American family, comprised of a minister for a father, a 'New York Belle' As an Irishman, Wilde has his revenge on the English by casting them in the part of the colonized, symbolized by the character of Sir Simon, but also gives England a chance to repent for its interference with Ireland by allowing them to empathise with the Irish position. Thus, Sir Simon is a representation of both the colonized and the colonizer. Presented as the personification of the Irish Question, the ghost is discussed at breakfast, an echo of my view earlier that the English merely considered Ireland, at a distance whilst appeasing their greed by eating, as a problem to solve. Sir Simon's refusal of the Rising Sun Lubricator corresponds to England's patronising, inadequate attempts to mollify Ireland, such as the Catholic Emancipation Act of 1829 Paradoxically, relieving Sir Simon of his chains (that is, Ireland of her total slavery to England in matters of government), which are symbolic of his prison term as a ghost, only makes him more a slave than ever, which is reminiscent of the phrase from In her case, she depended on England not only politically, but also financially, and, despite several bloody rebellions, independence could only truly be granted in the civilised form of a treaty.
The spirit of Sir Simon, however, proves to be invincible. His spirit is, in turn, a pun signifying the spirit of Ireland - that is, the unassailable determination of the Irish people whose rebellions eventually resulted in their independence from England. Resolved to scare away the Otis family, representing the English, Sir Simon betrays the Irish love of spectacle, teasingly asking for the reader's permission to speak of the theatre rather than supernatural mysteries.
As Owen Dudley Edwards says, ''The Selfish Giant' in particular suggests...the Giant as owner of the Big House with the little children as peasants and, presumably, Catholics." Denying the children permission to play in his garden, a place which evokes the idea of the 'Garden of England', Wilde pokes fun at the bureaucratic English government's creation of laws concerned with Ireland by building a 'high wall' Soon, however, a Utopia is created in which the children play happily in the Giant's garden with his permission, reminiscent of Wilde's suggestion that 'England [should] adopt some Irish qualities while shedding Irish territories." Only when the 'high wall', which perhaps foreshadows the tyrannical grip of the Soviets on Berlin, is knocked down with a 'great axe' This mirrors Wilde's views on revolution in Ireland, implying that he supports violence as a means of gaining freedom for the next generation. On the one hand, this contradicts the quote in the title, and therefore the romantic image of the eternally-struggling, socially inferior Celt, epitomised in Wilde's aphorism, 'we are in all the gutter, but some of us are looking at the stars' On the other hand, however, it is important to remember that there have been not one, but eight Irish rebellions in less than four hundred years, the Easter Uprising of 1916 leading to the Anglo-Irish War of 1919-1921, resulting in the creation of the Irish Free State in 1922. In other words, Wilde may have said that, 'The creative instinct is strong in the Celt, and it is the Celt who leads in art' This is clear in his However, his defence of revolution, unsurprisingly, is most apparent in The literal translation of the Nihilists' J.K. Rowlingesque Latin password, 'Per sanguinem ad libertatem' Moreover, pre-empting Theodor Adorno, who said that, 'After Auschwitz, writing poetry is barbaric' Reading can only ever be 'a rehearsal for revolution' For he states, implicitly referring to Ireland's future, that action is the one true weapon: 'I think little of pen and paper in revolution. One dagger will do more than a hundred epigrams'
On the subject of revolution, Wilde's writing promotes not only physical, but also vocal violence. His characters often engage in verbal duels designed to display the Irish love of talk for talk's sake; as I mentioned previously, Mrs Cheveley notes in Humorously mocking the Irish 'gift of the gab', Wilde tells us of the Selfish Giant's 'visit [to] his friend the Cornish ogre', noting the fact that he 'stayed with him for seven years' and that 'After the seven years were over, he had said all that he had to say, for his conversation was limited'. Their farewell conversation both sends up the English stereotype of the talkative Irishman and reveals the egotism of the aristocratic Englishman dominant throughout Wilde's work.
This satirical episode anticipates Kiberd's view that Wilde 'question[s] the assumption that, just because the English are one thing, the Irish must be its opposite'
For a writer whom Joseph O'Connor considers to be a 'revolutionary socialist' In contrast to his declaration in For example, the Sparrow in He even goes as far as giving advice to the prospective His repetition of phrases is reminiscent of Frank Delaney's storyteller, who theatricalises storytelling and performs his own particular ritual at the beginning of a tale.
However, as is proven in The storyteller here personifies the eternally starving Ireland of the Famine years and Wilde's lifetime, hungry for both food and freedom, yet often subject to 'ignorant people' who have 'no use for stories' and give him 'no food'.
Clearly, storytelling is a 'profession' which requires talent and yet rewards nothing. The stereotypical English view of the Irish means that the latter constantly play court jester to the former, and the Irish disgust at having to play a part is exemplified by Lord Arthur Savile's thoughts, who implicitly compares the Irish to unpaid actors, fated to live out future tragedies because of the actions (or lack of action) of England.
Another story which demonstrates the fact that the English were only interested in the Irish as a submissive colony who performed at their will, changing their religion and language to fit in with English habits, is Witness the eponymous Infanta's incessant commands to the Dwarf to dance with her Evidently, the Irish are welcome to take the stage, as long as the play is not a tragedy, for, as soon as it is, the stereotype of the spoilt English brat returns, intent on every day being his or her 'Birthday'. This is shown in the Infanta's response to the Dwarf's dying of a broken heart: 'For the future let those who come to play with me have no hearts'. Tunbridge Wells is famously the home of the 'Disgusted' middle classes' stiff upper lip, so this phrase, in its brevity, implies that the English are just as brief in their grief, in contrast to the Irish Catholics and their tradition of mourning the dead for a certain length of time in the form of singing and a wake
The idea that the English want the Irish to be duplicates of themselves is continued in Although Cecily is a member of the aristocracy, her prescriptive education from a strict governess mimics England's attempts to limit Catholic Education in the Penal Laws of 1695. You should give it up. It is not quite womanly... Men don't like it'.
The Colonel's use of the adjective 'dangerous' echoes the maxim, 'A little knowledge is a dangerous thing'
One of the ways in which Wilde himself, having been 'condemned to speak the language of Shakespeare' The 'image of the stage Irishman' This view of Ireland as a myth-making nation is satirised in Wilde's humanisation of the paranormal. Not only are we shown the inner monologue of the ghost, indignant because the Otises offer him 'the Rising Sun Lubricator, and throw pillows at his head'
Despite the comedy within the oxymoronic military language Wilde uses to portray the Otis twins' battle against Sir Simon, the scenes of mock warfare seem to re-enact the violence perpetrated by the English towards the Irish. On one occasion, he finds 'Washington Otis waiting for him there with the big garden -syringe; and being thus hemmed in by his enemies on all sides...he vanishe[s] into the great iron stove'. This episode echoes the fairy tale In Wilde's version however, our sympathies are reversed, and it is the 'witch', Sir Simon, representing Ireland's persecuted Catholics, for whom we feel sorry.
The Otis twins' symbolic murder of Sir Simon reflects Wilde's major motif of the double. Represented often in Victorian literature, appearing in both As McCormack suggests, 'the colony is a repository for the 'other', a mirror-image which reverses the colonizer's vision of himself' This is especially evident in Ernest and Algy are doubles, as are Gwendolen and Cecily, as well as Miss Prism and Chasuble, reflected in the echoes in their speech.
On the other hand, Wilde also implicitly illustrates just how different the 'distinctively and mystically 'Celtic'' The character of Mr. Podgers in Thus, Mr. Podgers is expected to display his skills in chiromancy, while at the same time satisfying the English stereotype of how a chiromantist should look.
The state of affairs turns sinister, however, when Lord Arthur Savile, whom Mr. Podgers informs that he will commit a murder, murders Mr Podgers himself. This is clearly an extreme metaphor for the long slow murder of Ireland by England - the murder of their independence, of their religion, and of their rights. Clearly, England's happiness lies, in their opinion, in the destruction of anything which attempts to show them the repulsiveness of their imperialism. Hence, Mr. Podger's murder represents England's suppression of her negative qualities. This suppression of the 'other' is a theme which also appears in As one critic has noted, 'The resident ghost is the ultimate commodity, who is released into death in exchange for a box of jewels. The ghostly is contained and repelled'. Ultimately, however, rather than viewing this conclusion as a cynical view of English materialism, it is possible to see it as an echo of Patrick Pearse's nationalistic 'aesthetic', which 'frequently celebrated the beauty of boys dying bravely in their prime, rather than growing into the compromises of adulthood'. So although Wilde, as I have already argued, espoused the idea of a rebellion in Ireland in order to win independence, he evidently also did not believe that that rebellion should involve the sacrifice of youth.
Wilde shows a curiously Irish prizing of youth in his work, particularly in As Owen Dudley Edwards has observed, 'The preservation of youth in In this myth, the king asks a Druid how long he will rule, and the latter tells him forever, unless his son-in-law takes the crown from him. His only novel takes its inspiration from both Yeats's Yeats personifies Ireland as a 'Poor Old Woman' This rather vampiric image suggests a major theme of many of Wilde's works, in which 'the erotic animated female threatens to reify or emasculate the hero' Evidently, Wilde's tone in writing about youth demonstrates much more than the purely aesthetic interest with which so many critics are concerned. Dorian Gray's end, 'with a knife in his heart'
In conclusion, Wilde's writing may barely touch on the subject of Ireland directly, but it is certainly concerned with his native country in an oblique sense. Defying the narrow-minded English view of the Irish as a people existing only to be conquered, Wilde instead attempts to realise, in his work, George Bernard Shaw's witticism, 'England had conquered Ireland, so there was nothing for it but to come over and conquer England'. Most significantly, however, he demonstrates that to be English and to be Irish is often one and the same thing.