The University of In addition to providing access to one million printed volumes, ten kilometres of archives and five thousand printed periodicals, the library serves as a self-study facility accommodating 1600 study spaces and 150 computer workstations.
Each year approximately one million loans are issued and one hundred thousand reservations made. At the heart of this sizable operation lies the main issue desk located on the first floor.
The aim was to keep the model as simple and efficient as possible without compromising the validity of the results.
A substantial amount of empirical data was required for the verification of assumptions, estimation of parameters, fitting of distributions and validation of output. This was collected during the first two weeks of the Easter break and is included in Reference source not found. .
The computer model was developed using Simul8, a visual interactive modelling environment geared specifically towards discrete event business simulation.
Because one of the main experimental factors was the customer arrival rate, the average inter-arrival time remained constant throughout each run. The model was therefore non-terminating, essentially simulating just one period in the day. Appropriate initial conditions would have been very hard to determine, especially since they would have depended on the model inputs. Giving each run a warm start was therefore not an option, and so a suitable warm-up period had to be found.
Simul8's time check feature was used to record the value of three key response variables at sixty-second intervals. The data obtained from three separate runs was then exported to Excel and plotted. The most valuable plots were of the average time in the system and are given in Reference source not found. . In each case, steady state was reached within thirty minutes and so the warm-up period was set to 1800 seconds.
Steps were taken to verify the model throughout the development cycle. Simul8's step function was used to follow individual customers through the system, the utilisation of individual work centres was monitored to check that they were all receiving work items, and a number of extreme value tests were carried out. These tests are listed in Table 2.
In addition to validating the conceptual model (see sections 2.7 and 4.1), it was necessary to check that the computer model simulated the real system with sufficiently accuracy.
With up to seven thousand users entering each day, the library is approximately three times busier during the summer term than it is now. Assuming that demand on the issue desk and self-service machines is roughly proportional to the number people using the library, as many as 450 customers could be expected to enter the system each hour during peak times.
Results for each scenario are included in Reference source not found. , a summary is provided in Table 4.
Based on the results obtained from the computer model, scenario 2 appeared to represent the optimal trade-off strategy between system performance (service times) and efficiency (librarian utilisation). The results also showed that there were no significant gains to be made from the installation of additional self-service machines.