This report is aimed to design a torque sensor measurement system. This would include from selection of strain gauges i.e. 5mm steel to derivation of formulas. This measurement system is divided into four blocks as each of them has its own specific task and is believed that such separation would enable the system to work more efficiently. Torque is measured on the shaft by a torque sensor and signal is then produced by a Wheatstone Bridge Circuit which is then followed by signal processing with the use of a amplifier and low pass filter so that signal is in a suitable form to be displayed and can be easily identified on a signal presentation unit. An accurate torque measurement system must be calibrated to produce accurate results and can either be done by self-calibration in digital signal or zeroisation in signal of analogue form. Sensor capability and suggested method to check if the torque sensor is insensitive to other physical changes is also discussed.
Torsion: is a twisting strain produced when a torque is applied to an object. For example, torsion is the strain experienced by a length of wire when a twisting force is applied to one end while the other end is fixed. It can be measured by observing how much an object twists due to a given torque. When a cylindrical object one unit long is twisted at one end, and the other end is held fixed, the amount the ends of the cylinder rotate relative to each other is a measure of the torsion.
Shear stress: A stress often represented by  in which the top and bottom of a material are pushed in opposite horizontal directions and it can be defined as
Shear Strain: The amount of deformation by shearing, in which parallel lines slide past each other in a certain degree. The measurement is expressed as the tangent of the change in angle between lines that were initially perpendicular. It is often known as angle distortion and represented by . It can be found by
.
Shear modulus: An elastic constant for the ratio of shear stress to shear strain. The shear modulus is often represented by letter G. It can be defined as follows:
General torsion equation is given by:
Transducers: are designed to measure force, torque, moment or pressure mostly, using inexpensive, easy to install, strain gauges to provide an output signal (voltage) which then can be processed to give relative measurement readings easily. To measure torque, the kind of transducer needed is a torque sensor.
In general, a given measurement system can be divided into four elements and each of the element is responsible for a certain task. From design point of view, it would be more efficient to concentrate design one element at one time without worrying about the others. The element flow chart is shown below
Sensing element: This is an element that measure physical process and gives an either mechanical or electrical output.
Signal conditioning element: This element converts output of sensing element into a more suitable form for further processing. It usually involves converting mechanical output from sensing element to an electrical signal.
Signal processing element: This element is responsible for signal processing and often involves amplification of signal, error compensation, convert analogue signal to digital form if necessary, etc.
Signal presentation element: This presents the final measured output value in a form that can be easily recognised. Display units from a pointer-scale indicator (analogue) to computer (analogue/digital) all belong to this family.
This design covers all the basic requirements needed in a torque measurement system. It is believed that this circuit can improve by using a Wheatstone Bridge constant current circuit as using constant current in a Wheatstone Bridge circuit