Within all human beings there is a great desire and need to feel accepted. This is mainly because we are social beings and we tend to interact with others around us, as Schacter's study on affiliation shows we need other human contact, Atkinson (2000). We do though interact differently with certain types of people; the form of interaction may vary depending on how well we know the person. Such as if they were a family member or close friend. However our need to be accepted is most prominent when interacting with people we do not know. This is where self-conscious emotions are important as these are related to how we feel others view us. The self-conscious emotions of embarrassment, shame and guilt can occur in a number of situations. We usually feel them when we feel we have done something wrong and seem inadequate. They are difficult to analyse though as they can overlap in meaning, as one persons embarrassment can be another person's shame.
When considering the links between self-conscious emotions embarrassment is usually linked more closely with shame. Whilst shame is seen as the most intense of the emotions, much more than guilt which is more of a passing emotion. Shame can lead to more long-term feelings of regret and depression. Guilt is similar but is more of a nagging feeling that who have done wrong and is therefore not as intense. Embarrassment on the other hand is related to feeling foolish or like an idiot, after having said or done something of this nature such as falling over. The emotions of shame and guilt or more morally significant than embarrassment, possibly identifying why they are more closely linked. They are more personal and usually originate from an action that has affected someone else; the person usually feels they have done something morally wrong.
The emotions we are considering then are obviously impossible to put into categories of which results could be placed into, as they overlap too much. Therefore this experiment was carried out in a qualitative manner. In the hope of finding links and differences between shame, guilt and embarrassment. Hoping to identify situations in which these emotions occur by studying participant's examples of the three emotions.
The human need for acceptance is clearly shown in the results coming from the examples given concerning embarrassment. They nearly all relate to making a fool of yourself in front of strangers. It is in front of strangers that we feel the most intense need for acceptance. Embarrassment is a feeling that we do not want to happen to us. It is related to feeling singled out, self esteem and is unexpected. It draws negative attention towards ourselves and more importantly makes us feel less intelligent. This is important as Buss found in his cross-cultural study what people universally find most attractive about human beings is intelligence, Eysenk (2001).
Shame and embarrassment are shown to be much more personal emotions with a greater use of personal experience being used to describe them. They are remembered much longer than embarrassment therefore personal experience is going to be much more likely. Shame is seen to be much more specific and much more intense, it is almost certainly attached to how we feel we have behaved towards other people. More specifically towards people we know and care about. It is linked to self-image and is associated with lying, betrayal and being false. It can in some senses be confused with embarrassment as it is a kind of deeper and much more long-term form of embarrassment.
Guilt seems to be less intense and appears to be easier to recover from, as you feel bad for yourself and how your actions have affected you rather than other people. The findings tend to agree with that of Tagney (1996), that embarrassment is something that we do not want to happen to ourselves whilst we feel bad when we have guilt or shame as it has directly affected someone else we care about. A much larger study with more specific categories would have to be done to gain more specific and viable data.