The Great Leap Forward was an initiative put forward by Mao Zedong which was ratified in May of 1958 at the Second Session of Eight Party Congress and was chiefly an attempt to catch up with the West in economic terms. Mao focussed on setting grain and steel targets to boost production and moulded the existing cooperatives into a smaller number of communes. He wanted to achieve this through a process of 'walking on two legs' by combining modern, large-scale capital intensive methods with traditional, small-scale methods of production. However, despite these seemingly good intentions the Great Leap Forward was a one of the biggest failures in China's recent history and there are a number of reasons for its lack of success.
One important reason to consider is how much it was solely Mao's influence and how much he personally was responsible for the Great Leap Forward's (GLF) lack of success. Obviously as the most powerful man within the Chinese Communist Party the majority of authority lay with him and certainly "Mao himself, as with the Hundred Flowers earlier, again was clearly the critical figure pushing forward an innovative program" Of course this alone does not necessarily mean he was the reason for its unsuccessful path but there are a number of examples of how Mao did indeed make the situation worsen and reach crisis point.
Some historians have concentrated on Mao's utopian views perhaps not allowing to him to see the actual situation and having too much faith in human nature. His decision to call the process a 'Leap' forward shows he knew how much he wanted to achieve against a very small time scale and he has been criticised for not thoroughly planning how would be the most effective way of doing so. Mao knew how far China was behind the West in terms of their economy but seemed to believe that having faith in socialism overtaking capitalism would be enough. It was almost as though he was actually "convinced that he had a formula for boosting agricultural production which would guarantee the success of his utopian plans"
It could be argued that Mao's desire to beat the West overshadowed everything else and led him to have such a blinkered view that ultimately he would have done anything to achieve his goal. So even if he did not have an infallible belief in human nature before he came to power, he forced himself into believing that "human will and energy, properly mobilised can overcome any objective impediments to revolutionary change and economic development" All of this contributed towards the impossibly ambitious aims and methods Mao pushed forward and which were the some of the main causes for the number of people who suffered as a result of the GLF.
Even in the official Resolution on Party History ultra left deviations were blamed and Mao's policies of "excessive targets, the issuing of arbitrary directions, boastfulness, and stirring up of a 'communist wind'" It was not only those who already worked in these areas who had to contribute, "Everyone had to meet a quota by handing over their metal possessions." Mao's megalomania meant that he refused to accept criticism and would not believe that his strategy was not working until it was too late to rectify the damage.
However it was not solely Mao who was responsible for these policies and ambitious targets, the entire leadership of the Party can have part of the blame attributed to them at least. The Party had been extremely successful up until the period of the GLF and maybe they could not envisage one of their policies completely failing in such a way. The "combination of inexperience and arrogance that it said to have characterized the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party" This may have led the leadership into falling into Mao's train of thought where they let "their own revolutionary aspirations overwhelm their appreciation of the material and ideological constraints on what was possible to do at that point in time"
The leadership then, Mao included, were far too slow in realising how much the population were suffering from the GLF, predominantly because of their na In fact late in 1958 "the leaders did acknowledge that the GL had produced some disorganisation and problems; but they remained blind to the magnitude and nature of the difficulties that were developing" This may not have been true of the entire leadership however, there is evidence that some leaders were just too scared to stand up to Mao. Many were desperate to keep hold of their positions of power and knew that Mao would not react kindly to any criticism that was put his way.
One glaring example of this is Mao's treatment of the Minister of Defence, Marshall Peng Duhuai, who was one of the few people to report back to the Party that things were not actually as good as they appeared to be when he toured parts of the country in the autumn of 1958. This one incident had a dramatic effect on the success of the GLF as it meant that a new upsurge in radicalism took place in 1959 and 1960 as "everyone was eager to demonstrate that they leaned to the 'left' instead of to the 'right'" This has led to the argument that if enough senior leaders had dared to stand up to Mao "the famine could easily have been arrested after the first year of the GLF"
This fear of voicing criticism was not just a problem at the senior leadership level but all the way down the ranks of the Party. There is evidence to suggest that "Most communes and industrial units falsified production figures to show that they were more 'red' than their neighbours. On his travels across China in 1958 Mao "listened to reports designed to flatter him, which hailed the fantastic success in agriculture that he had wisely predicted"
One such report came from Anhui province where the man responsible for its terrible famine and its reforms "was a paunchy, aggressive former peasant called Zeng Xisheng" Mao hailed him as the perfect role model for other parts of China to look to and to try and produce similarly large amounts of grain and steel. The problem was that Zeng was using extreme methods to make these quotas and they could not possibly have enjoyed any long term success. He is thought to have locked local party secretaries locked up in rooms for weeks until they agreed that they would make the targets set in front of them.
Zeng also had an impact in another area where the GLF did not provide success; small, backyard furnaces. When Mao put forward huge targets for making steel, "Zeng showed this could be done not just in big furnaces but in every backyard" This idea just seemed to encourage the melting down of useful steel items in everyday life into lumps of steel which were rarely used for anything that actually improved China's economy or standard of living. In addition "Forests and any available rainforests were torn up to fuel the production of steel, most of which was useless" Even Mao himself later accepted responsibility for these small-scale blast furnaces and admitted they were one of the worst mistakes of the GLF.
A further consequence of officials at all levels exaggerating the number of targets they met was that they were enjoying a new found power and status which many had not experienced to such an extent before. Even when Mao finally realised that he needed to reverse the measures of the GL he found it very difficult "to convince those levels at provincial, municipal, county and commune levels, whose power and resources had grown enormously" An example of this is two early stalwarts of the Leap from Henan and Sichuan, Wu Zhipu and Li Jinquan, who "showed little inclination to pull back on their earlier positions
Another important factor to consider during the GLF is the role of the Soviet Union. It was Stalin who launched the first five-year plan in 1928 and this was to be the model for many of Mao's policies in the GLF. Mao did not take any of this on board though and his reluctance to listen to their advice even went so far as to cause the Sino-Soviet split in 1960 which did nothing to help China's economy. All Soviet technicians were removed from China and Russia cancelled their aid program which only exacerbated the shortages and poverty across China. This went some way to contributing to the fact that by the end of the GLF "roughly thirty million people, primarily the very young and the old, starved to death"
Further influence from the Soviet Union came from Trofim Denisovich Lysenko who was a Soviet agronomist, and was the leader of the Soviet school of genetics that opposed Mendel's laws and maintained that acquired characteristics can be inherited. His theories received official support; they were taught in biology courses in the USSR and incorporated, with sometimes disastrous results, into Soviet agricultural programmes. China had their own Lysenkoist in the form of Luo Tianyo and in a purge of Party members in the 1942 rectification movement "Luo enthusiastically persecuted those who believed in genetics" It has been argued that Mao used this scientific reasoning for the GLF and that in 1958 "Mao personally drew up an eight-point Lysenkoist blueprint for all Chinese agriculture"
It was not simply scientific and economic issues which led to the failure of the GLF but socially the peasants resisted some of Mao's policies. "Many peasants resisted communal living and the confiscation of private plots" In addition there seems to have been a lack of competent personnel to administer the communes and the size of them proved to be a problem. The existence of communal places to eat, where theoretically one was allowed to eat as much as you liked, meant that none of the excess food was saved and when the leaders demanded sufficient food to feed the cities, neither the people in rural or urban areas had enough to eat.
Furthermore Mao and the Party began to see the peasants as the enemy and not as a group that desperately needed help and freedom from the restrictions of the GLF. Party documents at the beginning of the GLF show that officials believed peasants to be standing in the way of progress and Mao even believed that the peasants were hiding their grain so he refused to open the state granaries to ease the crisis. To add to the situation "over the three years from 1958 China doubled her grain exports and cut her imports of food" Overall the rural sector was severely damaged by a host of policies "designed to subordinate agriculture to the drive for rapid industrial growth"
Even if the Party had acted more quickly as the failure of the GLF policies began to emerge they still would have faced major difficulties due to the state planned structure of the Chinese economy not being able to cope or adapt to the situation. The GLF put unbearable pressure on the poorly developed transport system, "thus inducing bottlenecks and the overstocking of goods at critical transit points" This imbalance within the structure of the national economy, combined with inevitable bottlenecks meant that "stoppages in production occurred and many enterprises overextended their productive capacity"
In addition, during the years of the GLF, China was further disadvantaged by poor harvests as a result of bad weather. The "summer harvest of 1959 was poor, and the harvests of 1960 were disastrous" with one third of China's arable stricken with drought and another sixth being flooded. So aside from Mao's insatiable ambition and the Party's co-operation with such extreme policies it is also necessary to consider that drought, flood and Soviet betrayal may have complicated the situation.
However Mao was the dominating figure who was determined to go through with the GLF and without his strong desire to beat the West and prove that Socialism could provide a stronger economy than capitalism then the GL would not have been such a tragedy. If you take the role of the leadership as well (and the record makes clear that Liu Shaoqi, Deng Xiaoping, and most other leaders supported the GLF wholeheartedly throughout The poor harvests and natural circumstances only served to deepen the crisis which was already occurring due to the unrealistic targets for grain and steel and unwillingness of the Party to accept criticism even when they realised that it was not going according to plan.