A 73 year old diabetic lady referred and admitted from an outpatient rheumatology clinic on the
Given the presenting complaints of shortness of breath, pleuritic chest pain and raised D-dimer, pulmonary embolus is the most likely cause of Clinical features to be looked for on physical examination to support such a diagnosis are:
Clinical presentation of a pulmonary embolus is dependent on the size of the embolus. Small emboli may present with transient faints, dyspnoea and slight pyrexia. Medium emboli resulting in infarction present with; in addition to the above, haemoptysis, pleurisy and pleural effusion. Larger emboli affecting over 60% of the pulmonary bed present with acute cor pulmonale with sudden dyspnoea and shock. Clearly, A small pulmonary embolus is thus suggested by these symptoms.
Further differentials for the presenting combination of pleuritic chest pain and shortness of breath to be considered:
Musculoskeletal - e.g. rib fracture, reasonable suggestion, elderly may have osteoporosis.
Pneumothorax - unlikely, history is usually of
Pneumonia - Associated symptoms of productive cough, pleurisy and dyspnoea are less common in the elderly, 80% of patients with pneumonia present with fever clearly not the case here.
Connective tissue disease - no known history.
Malignancy involving pleura or pathology under the diaphragm - no history of weight loss, malaise.
Pericarditis - Extremely unlikely, clinical features include central, poorly localized chest tightness that varies with movement, posture and respiration.
An elderly lady who appeared fit and well. She wasn't obviously jaundiced, cyanosed or cannulated and had no accompanying respiratory or mobility aids.
Pulmonary embolus. The principal cause of which is a deep vein thrombosis.   Clearly, On presentation, she had pleuritic chest pain exacerbated by laughing and sneezing. Her left foot and ankle were swollen suggestive of a deep venous thrombosis, there was however, no associated erythema or warmth. VQ scanning, chest x-ray and D-dimer level will help clarify the diagnosis. An ECG may also be useful, T wave inversion in leads V1-3 may be seen with pulmonary emboli.
Risk factors for deep vein thrombosis include:
As Previous differentials e.g. musculoskeletal cause such as rib fracture must be considered and investigated.
 At this point it impacts usually blocking the vessel lumen. Pulmonary embolism results when such thromboemboli impact into the pulmonary arterial system. The majority of emboli arise from thrombosis of deep leg veins (e.g. calf, popliteal, femoral and iliac veins). The 2 main consequences of embolization in the pulmonary arterial tree are (i) increased pulmonary arterial pressure (increases strain on the right side of the heart) and (ii) ischaemia of the lung where ventilated areas of the lung aren't perfused with blood.
 This has only been compounded by the recent chest pain and associated shortness of breath.
 She was happy to go home and reassured as to the explanation given concerning her condition. She was fully independent on discharge, it was felt there was no need for immediate implementation of a social services care package. It was decided she should continue to be followed up in rheumatology as the underlying cause for the chronic swelling of her left foot is still unclear.
As the single most likely explanation for the presenting symptoms in this case, I have chosen to present evidence for the management of pulmonary embolism and also generalised thromboembolic disease. Treatment of thromboembolism aims to (i) reduce acute symptoms of deep vein thrombosis, (ii) prevent morbidity and mortality associated with thrombus extension, post-thrombotic syndrome and pulmonary embolisation, (iii) reduce recurrence and (iv) minimise any adverse effects of treatment.
 Concerning aetiology of the presenting diagnosis of thromboembolism, she is of older age, has history of ischaemic cardiac disease, is overweight and fairly immobile. In addition she is diabetic, anaemic and has renal impairment. This highlights the need in such a patient that whilst addressing the presenting symptoms her comorbidity also needs to treated and the functioning of the respective systems optimised. Whilst such a patient when 'well' can be managed effectively in the community with a combination of GP and outpatient centred treatment any exacerbation in their condition such as the presenting symptoms can have a knock-on effect on the control of diabetes or renal function requiring secondary care attention in their own right. Her comorbidity demonstrates the usefulness of specialist nurse provided care e.g. diabetes nurses. Providing information and advice concerning the relevant condition can only help to optimise compliance and patient self-management of the said condition relieving strain on both outpatient and inpatient NHS resources. However, as with all resources; demand far outweighs supply, this must be addressed in the future to increase quality of patient care.
This case also highlights the importance of considering the clinical impression, examination findings and investigation results as a whole when making a diagnosis. It is impossible to rely totally on the results of a single investigation such as a VQ scan as these may totally contradict your clinical findings as in this case. In this situation clinical experience must be called upon.
The National Service Framework for Older people was published as a guide to the treatment of Older people in the UK today. It has 5 aims, (i) to eradicate age discrimination in the health service, (ii) to provide person-centred care which is importantly (iii) intermediate and (iv) in a General Hospital environment and (v) to promote health and activity in older people This framework strategy sets measurable goals to be achieved within set-time frames and as such should be incorporated into routine practice.
Use of multi-disciplinary team led care in patient treatment.
Complexity of comorbidity and its impact on management.
Interplay between clinical impression, physical examination and investigations.
Need for outpatient follow-up on discharge.
Management of a chronic disease in both secondary and primary care.
The biopsychosocial model of health.