was taken to Rugby hospital by ambulance on the 09/04/06 complaining of shortness of breath and generally feeling 'unwell' for the week prior to admission.
Infective exacerbation of Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary disease (COPD). Reasonable diagnosis for the following reasons:
60 pack year smoking history.
Becomes dyspnoeic on exertion.
Severity of dyspnoea has worsened over a number of years.
No associated chest pain, haemoptysis, paroxsymal nocturnal dyspnoea. Possible orthopnoea.
Dyspnoea eases with combivent nebulisers and oxygen.
Dyspnoea associated with recent onset of malaise, productive cough, fever and shivering indicative of respiratory infection.
A thin elderly lady who appeared comfortable at rest. She was not obviously jaundiced or cannulated but had a nebuliser at her bedside which she had to stop the interview to use.  was fully conscious, cooperative and talked expressively and freely.
Infective exacerbation (bronchopneumonia) of COPD. Findings from the history and examination which support this diagnosis are:
Fever, productive cough with yellow sputum, dullness to percussion, bronchial breathing and basal crepitations all indicate consolidation which is associated with bronchopneumonia.
Tachypnoea, signs of hyperinflation and malnutrition such as thin body, barrel chest, pursing of lips and use of accessory muscles to aid respiration are all found in the 'pink puffer' (type A fighter) morphology associated with emphysema.
In bronchial breathing, noise from the larger airways predominates producing a harsher sound than that produced by normal breath sounds originating in the small airways and alveoli. The sounds increase through inspiration, stop near the end of inspiration and restart after a gap when air flows back through the larger airways during expiration.
Rhonchi or wheeze is defined as a continuous whistling sound due to the vibration of opposing walls of narrowed airways as air passes through them. Due usually to small airway obstruction as in COPD.
60 pack year smoking history. Cigarette smoking is the single most important risk factor for the development of COPD.
COPD patients typically demonstrate a progressive decline in lung function (as seen here) interposed with intermittent acute exacerbations leading to progressive respiratory symptoms, disability and respiratory failure.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) defines a group of chronic diseases characterised by reduced expiratory airflow and increased work of breathing. Reduction in airflow can be due to decreased lung elastic recoil, increased airway resistance or a combination of both. COPD encompasses chronic bronchitis and emphysema. Chronic bronchitis is a clinical diagnosis with symptoms of cough and excessive mucus production for most days out of 3 months for > 2 years. Clearly  fufills this definition. Emphysema is caused by progressive destruction of alveolar septa and capillaries leading to development of enlarged airways and airspaces, decreased lung elastic recoil and increased airway collapsibility. As detailed above,  fufils the 'pink puffer' appearance associated with this condition.
Physical-:  didn't appear overly frail at the time of interview but has over the last 2 years become progressively more incapacitated. She is extremely breathless on exertion able to walk a distance of 20m before having to rest. She finds stairs extremely difficult also. In addition she has poor appetite and as a consequence her nutritional intake is poor. She is extremely thin and this can only contribute to lowering her energy levels, further limiting her capacity for physcial exertion.
Psychological-: She is anxious about the progression of her breathlessness and is keen to find out about the impact of this on her future independence. She is anxious about returning home and how she will manage on her own but is reluctant to discuss care packages as feels this comprimises her indpendence greatly.
Social-:  lives alone in a first floor flat, the 15 steps to her door posing an increasing restriction on her ability to leave the flat and thus her independence. Prior to admission she received no help in her home at all and is now considering and moving towards accepting the need for a care package on her discharge. She may benefit from additional social interaction such as that provided by a day centre.
is set for discharge on the  after having been in hospital for 5 weeks. Her diarrhoea had been successfully treated on the  and she was able to transfer independently and manage stairs with some confidence. Occupational therapy has identified no need for their input. A care package is in place for her discharge with which  seemed fairly happy. Her observations are all currently stable and her respiratory function stabilised also with regular combivent nebulisers. Her oxygen saturations on the  was 90% on air and it is possible she will return home on oxygen. At the ward round on the  she seemed in relatively good spirits and didn't voice any concerns. Her appetite remains poor and dietician imput has recommended continuing Fortifresh 200ml BD and high calorie diet on discharge. She currently walks with a frame and again should return home with this.
Her prognosis is dependent on severity of airflow obstruction. Patients with a FEV1 <0.8L have an annual mortality of approxiamately 25%.
Cigarette smoking is the predominant risk factor for development of COPD. Other risk factors include increasing age, male gender, respiratory infections in childhood, low socio-economic status, airway hyperreactivity and 
1-antitrypsin deficiency.
Aims of treatment of  are to: (i) alleviate symptoms, (ii) prevent exacerbations, (iii) preserve optimal lung function and (iv) improve activities of daily living, quality of life and survival.
2 agonists: systematic review evidence has indicated that inhalation of 
2 agonists over a period of 1week - 6 months significantly improves FEV 1 and symptoms of dyspnoea when compared to placebo 1. Such studies have shown that in the long-term, 2/3 of those subjects with COPD have at least 15% reversibility with 
2 agonists. 
2 agonists have been shown however in those with asthma to be linked to increased risk of death, worsened control of asthma and deterioration in lung function.
Inhaled anticholinergics plus 2 agonists: various randomised controlled trials have shown that combining a 2 agonist e.g. albutarol with an anticholinergic such as ipratropium bromide for between 2-12 weeks has a modest but significant improvement in the degree of bronchodilation achieved when compared to either drug alone 2.
Oral corticosteroids: a single systematic review of short-term (2-4 weeks treatment) randomised controlled trials has shown when compared to placebo, oral corticosteroids significantly improve lung function. There is comparable randomised controlled trial looking at long-term treatment with corticosteroids 3. Any benefit obtained with corticosteroids must be balanced against the considerable side-effects associated with these drugs such as osteoporosis and induction of diabetes and the period of their use thus minimised.
Antibiotics: there are no available randomised controlled trials looking at the use of antibiotics in the short-term treatment of stable COPD. No signficant difference has been found between antibiotics versus placebo in either reducing the frequency of exacerbations or decline in lung function over a 5 year period 4. The trials concerned are of poor quality however so the results should be interpreted with caution. No specific recruitment criteria were applied.
Domiciliary oxygen treatment: over a 2 year period, domiciliary oxygen has been shown to improve survival when compared to receiving no oxygen in those patients with COPD and hypoxaemia 5. Various randomised controlled trials have demonstrated that continuous delivery of oxygen versus nocturnal treatment significantly reduces mortality over a year long period 6.
The National Service Framework for Older people was published as a guide to the treatment of Older people in the UK today. It has 5 aims, (i) to eradicate age discrimination in the health service, (ii) to provide person-centred care which is importantly (iii) intermediate and (iv) in a General Hospital environment and (v) to promote health and activity in older people 6. This framework strategy sets measurable goals to be achieved within set-time frames and as such should be incorporated into routine practice.
COPD affects mainly middle-aged and elderly patients. UK prevalence between 1990-1997 was 2% in men and 1% in women. As seen in the USA, this has certainly risen since then. Smoking cessation reduces the rate of decline in lung function back to that of non-smokers 6.
COPD is diagnosed by airflow obstruction indicated on respiratory function tests by a reduced FEV1:FVC ratio of <0.70 or a FEV1 2 standard deviations below predicted provided restrictive disease is excluded. Many asymptomatic smokers however have lung function abnormalities that predate symptoms which may be prevented by early smoking cessation. Screening healthy smokers to identify subclinical airway obstruction is however controversial. Whilst clearly, should they have abnomalities the benefits of giving up smoking is known, many patients will choose not to give up despite this. They then carry the burden of a progressive disease for which there is no cure for possibly many more years than would be the case if screening weren't in place. Far more individuals would be identified by screening placing increased demands on an already stretched healthservice.
An individual such as  may be managed effectively in a community setting with a multi-disciplinary team led care approach. Her needs comprise respiratory, dietary, mobility and social demands which for optimal care can only be met by individual specialties. General care and referrals can be managed by a general practitioner but acute exacerbation such as her presenting episode require specialist attention in a secondary care setting. Full, informed consent for all diagnostic and treatment proceedures is essential for all patients but especially so for an elderly individual such as . Her diagnosis, progressive nature of COPD and crucially prognosis should be clearly and fully explained.  had clearly made the association between her symptoms and the limitation they place on her mobility and subsequent independence. She was realistic about an expected lifespan. This case highlights the ethical principles of autonomy, beneficence and non-maleficience.  had recognised the causation of her COPD but didn't want to give up smoking. Other than presenting her with the statisitcs and the clear evidence that smoking cessation can reverse some of the limitation in lung function the decision to quit must be hers.
Patients from a stable family background and with social support respond best to treatment. She clearly has contact with her son who should be encoraged to contribute towards her care and as such should be involved in her treatment and diagnosis. 's health needs to be optimised to enable her to maximise independence and quality of life.