Longstanding depression and anxiety.
The most likely diagnosis given his alcohol history is a hepatocellular jaundice. Disease causing generalised damage to hepatocytes such as that caused by chronic excessive ethanol intake results in a predominant conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia. The main rate-limiting step in bilirubin metabolism is excretion by the canaliculi rather than conjugation. Disturbance of the passage of conjugated bilirubin through the biliary tree causes bilirubin to leak into the circulation. Conjugated bilirubin is soluble and thus excreted into the urine making it dark in colour as seen here. It also prevents the conversion of urobilinogen to stercobilinogen (pigment), faeces are consequently pale (also seen here). Hyperbilirubinaemia also cause puritus. Further differentials for the presenting complaint of jaundice:
Alcoholic hepatitis - reasonable given alcohol intake.
Cirrhosis - unlikely given no description of ascites.
Hepatic malignancy or metastases - needs consideration given weight loss and malaise.
Viral infection - e.g. hepatitis B, C, no identifiable risk factors e.g. receipt of blood transfusions or sharing of IV needles.
Haemochromatosis - presents with grey skin pigmentation.
Side-effect of Mirtazapine
Findings on examination which would support a diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease:
Alcohol dependence and associated withdrawal should be considered in this case .
Clearly, Findings expected on physical examination to confirm this diagnosis are tachycardia, hypotension, tremor, fits and hallucinations. Delirium tremens comprises the most serious alcohol withdrawal state; managed as a medical priority.
A young gentleman who appeared fit and well. He was obviously jaundiced, skin had a 'greyish' tinge. He was cannulated and had no respiratory aids around his bedside. There was a zimmer frame at the bedside without which He was fully conscious, cooperative and talked expressively and freely. He was fairly anxious, fidgeting throughout the interview.
Most likely cause of the presentation is Excess ingestion of alcohol can cause a wide spectrum of liver disease ranging from fatty liver to alcoholic hepatitis and cirrhosis. Fatty liver is often asymptomatic. Factors supporting a diagnosis of acloholic hepatitis for
a chronic intake of excess alcohol
mild to moderate symptoms of ill health such as generalised weakness and malaise.
he is jaundiced and has some signs of chronic liver disease such as hepatomegaly and liver flap.
he also presented with derangement of liver function tests.
Grey colouring of skin suggests
His symptoms of anxiety, tachycardia, weakenss and resting tremor suggest The tremor of delirium tremens is due to balancing of extensor and flexor muscle contraction and could be enhanced by asking Approximately 40% of people who misuse alcohol develop an acute withdrawal syndrome when they either abruptly stop or substantially reduce their alcohol consumption. Less than 5% of these develop delirium tremens. Hyperpyrexia, ketoacidosis, profound circulatory collapse, seizures, precipitation/enhancement of cardiac arrhythmias (relevant here) and injury to self or others are complications associated with such a withdrawal state. He should be monitored closely whilst an inpatient for emergence of these potential complications.
In alcoholic hepatitis, in addition to fatty changes within the liver there is infiltration by polymorphonuclear leucocytes and hepatocyte necrosis, particularly in zone 3. Additional features include Mallory bodies and giant mitochondria. If alcohol consumption continues alcoholic hepatitis may progress to cirrhosis.
 Poor appetite is a common finding in heavy drinkers. He did not demonstrate any signs of chronic alcoholic liver disease such as caput medusae and ascites.
 It is crucial he recognises such triggers to his drinking and finds alternative ways of coping in order to stop drinking.
 His father and uncle drink heavily. He is relatively socially isolated and must be assisted in finding alternative opportunities for social interaction and activities.
 He was relieved as to his diagnosis and felt he had been fully informed regarding his condition and the treatment he is receiving. He is no longer experiencing tremors and is feeling stronger daily. He should be provided with advice and support concerning alcohol cessation. He must however be proactive in this process; long-term remission will only be achieved should he play an involved, active and committed part in his rehabilitation.
Alcohol abuse and dependence has wide reaching detrimental impact. It adversely affects all the major body systems, with prolonged excess associated with many psychological/psychiatric problems and impacts on society in terms of interpersonal relationship and work difficulties, criminal behaviour and loss of social position e.g. homelessness. The government document 'Health of the Nation' set 'safe' levels of alcohol consumption at 21 units per week for men and 14 for women. In 2004, this was exceeded by an estimated 28% of UK men and 11% women Alcohol intake of more than 160g of ethanol per day for men and 80g per day for women over a 10 year period is likely to lead to cirrhosis
Ethanol is metabolized in the liver by 2 pathways resulting in an increased NADH/NAD ratio. This results in both increased hepatic fatty acid synthesis and decreased fatty acid oxidation with resultant hepatic accumulation of fatty acids and esterification to glycerides. Acetaldehyde formed by ethanol oxidation may contribute to producing liver cell damage.
Biopsy is the definitive diagnostic method but isn't typically carried out as the results are unlikely to alter the diagnosis or therapy. Up to 30% of patients with clinical features of severe alcoholic hepatitis haven't been found to have alcoholic hepatitis on biopsy Mild to moderate cases of alcoholic hepatitis most usually recover without specific treatment, management in these cases is aimed at the underlying dependency.
 Gastrointestinal bleeding has been reported by a number of studies. There is huge variation in efficacy of published results, this has been attributed to small study numbers, different treatment regimens and different measures of outcomes.
 Nutritional supplementation providing a positive nitrogen balance and correcting this deficiency has been found to improve outcome
Future advances in the management of alcoholic hepatitis include S-adenosylmethionine, polyenylphosphatidylcholine and N-acetyl cysteine (alcohol toxicity involves glutathione depletion). Genetic predisposition to alcoholism is an area of current research for example regarding disturbance of patterns of the main isoenzymes that metabolise alcohol such as aldehyde dehydrogenase and the individuals' reaction to ethanol.
The World Health Organisation defines dependence as a cluster of physiological, behavioural and cognitive components of variable intensity in which a psychoactive drug takes on high priority. Although many individuals particularly those with early alcohol-related problems can be effectively treated in primary care, those such as Mr P with alcohol-related complications and long-term alcohol abuse require specialist help. A multi-disciplinary team-led approach is often necessary. A GP can monitor progress long-term with regular monitoring of liver function tests for example. Specialist consultant care is required for those who experience severe withdrawal symptoms or who have impaired physical health. Specialist agencies such as Alcoholics Anonymous provide additional input.
An important ethical issue associated with the treatment of alcohol dependence is liver transplantation. For those patients with alcoholic liver disease, clinical outcomes of liver transplantation are comparable to those receiving transplants for other liver diseases The ethical impact is concerned with the lack of donor organs. There is a risk that recurrent alcohol abuse will lead to alcoholic liver disease in the grafted organ and the additional problem of non-compliance with immunosuppression. This has to be considered when allocating limited numbers of organs. However, many patients will achieve and maintain abstinence and should recover with transplantation. Most UK transplant units require a 6 month abstinence period for consideration for transplantation, He had been drinking until the time of admission.
In many parts of the UK, specialist NHS services provide specific, individually tailored care for individuals with drinking problems and other forms of substance misuse. Although there is clearly the need and willingness to provide such care in a general NHS hospital setting, there is more often than not insufficient funding to provide the appropriate resources and services for such comprehensive care.
Alcohol dependence - syndrome characterized by 3 or more of the following: strong desire or compulsion to drink, difficulty in controlling onset or termination of drinking or levels of alcohol use, physiological withdrawal state on cessation of alcohol or its use to avoid withdrawal symptoms, increasing tolerance to alcohol, progressive neglect of other interests, persisting use of alcohol despite clear evidence and awareness of nature and extent of harm it is causing.
Factors determining prognosis
The importance of a multi-disciplinary team in patient care
Co-morbidity and impact on patient's lifestyle
Biopsychosocial model of health