A 32 year old male with 7 month history of episodes of 'blankness' admitted on the  for elective ambulatory EEG monitoring .
A young man who appeared fit and well.  was fully conscious, cooperative and talked expressively and freely. He was attached to an ambulatory EEG recorder.
Following physical examination, the principal diagnosis still remains unclear. Neurological examination was unremarkable as is often the case in epilepsy.  right upper and lower limbs are smaller than the left. A CT scan performed in  showed that his left cerebral hemisphere is smaller than the right. It was suggested this might have occurred as a result of a large infarct at birth, which could possibly predispose him to seizures. The corticospinal tract decussates in the spinal cord, activity thus originating in the cerebral hemisphere will influence the contralateral side of the body explaining why disruption of the nervous activity originating in the motor cortex of the 'infarcted' left hemisphere impacts on the right side of the body (decreasing muscle size) in this patient. He has in addition an arachnoid cyst in the left hemisphere which most likely bears no relevance to his presenting symptoms.
Increased tone in right upper and lower limbs - associated with smaller limb size, ? possible additional contribution of anxiety.
Upgoing/extensor plantar response (right) - insignificant as isolated finding but combined with hypertonia on the right side, possibly suggestive of an upper motor neurone lesion, pathology on left as discussed above.
Clearly,  presents with a 7 month history of repeated episodes in which he feels he 'blanks out'. As previously stated, factors suggesting these episodes are complex partial seizures are that they appear to be responsive to anticonvulsant medication, he demonstrates some signs of automatism and as indicated by CT scan, he does have some infarctive damage to his left hemisphere which may predispose him to seizure activity. However, he has extensive past history of anxiety and more recent heavy alcohol abuse. Both these factors and their contribution to his current condition certainly shouldn't be underestimated. His episodes are extremely brief and frequent. For an individual having seizures of such frequency one would expect some at least to be of greater severity i.e. tonic clonic seizures. Seizures furthermore aren't clearly stereotyped. The fact that he has responded to anticonvulsant medication in the past indicates that this is probably sufficient indication to continue treating his episodes as seizures despite not having concrete evidence of their aetiology.
Clearly, these precipitating factors lend little weight to a diagnosis of epilepsy for . He does have some developmental damage but the relevance of this to his symptoms is uncertain.
Pathology: In a normal brain, synchronous neuronal discharge occurs in restricted groups whose controlled discharges produce the normal EEG rhythms. Spread of activity between cortical neurones is usually restricted. During a seizure, larger groups of neurones are activated repetitively and hypersynchronously. Additional loss of inhibitory synaptic contact between neurones causes the spike and wave EEG activity characteristic of epilepsy. An area of brain becomes epileptogenic because neurones have a predisposition to hyperexcitability either (i) due to abnormal migration patterns in utero or (ii) an acquired tendency e.g. due to trauma or brain neoplasms which alter seizure threshold.
Physical:  has experienced recurrent 'blank' episodes for the past 7 months, which although cause altered awareness have not resulted in complete loss of consciousness or injury.
Psychological: He has become increasingly concerned and anxious about the cause of his symptoms over the 2 months prior to admission and is keen to receive a diagnosis. He has a long history of anxiety and depression and these conditions certainly appear to be exacerbated by the uncertainty concerning the aetiology of his episodes.
Social:  is extremely close to his wife and her family. Their support and involvement in his treatment and care on discharge are essential in optimising compliance and prognosis concerning both his physical and mental health.
was discharged on the  having been given a neurology outpatient follow-up appointment. Whilst in hospital despite experiencing a number of self-recorded, unwitnessed episodes no epileptiform activity was demonstrated on EEG recording. He was happy to go home and discharged on lamotrigine. It was felt despite the lack of clinical evidence and doubt arising from the history given supporting a diagnosis of epilepsy he had responded to anticonvulsant medication in the past and this shouldn't be overlooked. For an individual such as  with significant history of depression and anxiety the long-term psychological impact of experiencing such episodes and associated uncertainty concerning their aetiology must be acknowledged. He was happy to take medication and accepted the social implications of being treated for epilepsy such as the driving restrictions. His symptomatic progression, development and response to medication should continue to be reviewed in an outpatient setting in the future. Future further EEG monitoring should be considered.
As the single most likely explanation for the presenting symptoms in this case, I have chosen to present evidence for the management of epilepsy.
Epileptic seizures are classified by whether their onset is focal (partial) or generalized. Partial seizures are further subclassified as simple partial seizures (consciousness retained throughout) or complex partial seizures (consciousness impaired at any stage). Partial seizures may become generalized. Classification is important as the different seizure types are managed differently. Up to 1% of the general population suffer from active epilepsy with 20-50 new cases per 100000 being diagnosed each year. Approximate annual death rate for epilepsy is 2 per 100000. Treatment of epilepsy aims to (i)reduce risk of subsequent seizures and improve prognosis of seizure disorder, (ii)if in remission to withdraw antiepileptic drugs without causing seizure recurrence, (iii) minimise any adverse effects of treatment.
Effects of monotherapy in newly diagnosed partial epilepsy: there are no placebo controlled randomised controlled trials available looking at the effects of carbamazepine, phenobarbital, phenytoin or sodium valproate as monotherapy in partial epilepsy, this is clearly an area for concern, however placebo controlled trial are now considered unethical. Systemic reviews comparing sodium valproate and carbamazepine have demonstrated carbamazepine has a higher 12 month seizure remission rate 1. When comparing phenytoin and carbamazepine, phenytoin is more likely to be withdrawn from use with side-effects including confusion, dizziness and headache 2.
Effect of adding a second line drug in drug resistant partial epilepsy: adding a drug such as lamotrigine to the usual treatment has been shown in systematic reviews to decrease seizure frequency when compared to adding placebo 3. There is however, an associated increase in frequency of adverse effects. There is no available evidence concerning the best second line agent to select, this is an area for future research.
Should single seizures be treated? : recurrence of seizures after a 2 year period of remission following a single seizure has been shown by randomised controlled trials to be reduced when compared to receiving no treatment. There is no evidence to show that long-term prognosis is altered in any way. There are however, well known adverse effects of long-term antiepileptic medication such as cognitive impairment and teratogenesis.
Factors increasing risk of relapse on withdrawal of treatment: suggested by a single randomised controlled trial include age, number of antiepileptic drugs being taken, type of seizure, whether seizures have continued since starting anticonvulsant medication and length of remission before withdrawal of medication 4.
Educational programmes: one randomised controlled trial assessing the impact of a 2 day programme covering current knowledge and understanding of epilepsy and its management improved compliance with treatment, acceptance and adjustment to living with epilepsy and psychosocial functioning when compared to control 5. The impact of such programmes must be assessed further prior to application for widespread implementation of similar interventions.
Future research could address the impact of psychological interventions e.g. CBT and relaxation therapy in the management of epilepsy as evidence concerning such interventions is scarce.
This case demonstrates the ethical issue of labelling an individual with a diagnosis when there is clinical doubt as to its applicability. Clearly whilst it is in the best interests of an epileptic to treat them with anticonvulsant medication, the burden of receiving a diagnosis of epilepsy isn't insignificant. It carries huge social implications such as the restrictions placed on ability to drive by the DVLA if experiencing current seizures or employability.  is an individual with moderate psychiatric comorbidity who has experienced a 7 month period of possible seizures, the aetiology of which is causing him increasing anxiety. For such an individual for whom antiepileptic medication has had some benefit in the past, then surely it is in his best interests to continue this and treat him as an epileptic than prolong and exacerbate both his chronic anxiety and depression. His recent alcohol abuse suggests a tendency to adopt maladaptive coping mechanisms.
Epilepsy is a condition which can be managed effectively in the community with a combined care package comprising primary care (GP), specialist secondary care (neurology outpatient clinic, epilepsy specialist nurses). The balance of healthcare provision between these 2 settings will vary with the stage of the disease. Diagnostic interventions and exacerbations e.g. status epilepticus will require management purely in secondary care for example.
Use of multi-disciplinary team led care in patient treatment.
Complexity of comorbidity and its impact on management.
Interplay between clinical impression, physical examination and investigations.
Need for outpatient follow-up on discharge.
Management of a chronic disease in both secondary and primary care.
The biopsychosocial model of health.