He was transferred from a general medical ward (A2N) to a stroke ward on the
 A reasonable diagnosis for the following reasons:
Collapse was sudden, of abrupt onset.
History of 2 previous cerebral strokes.
Differentials for consideration.
 Commonly occurs at night.
 Associated with severe, uncontrolled hypertension.
 However, no evidence of other presenting symptoms such as raised intracranial pressure or epilepsy.
 Minor head trauma such as hitting head on impact could cause haemorrhage in an elderly patient predisposed to haemtoma formation as a result of cerebral atrophy and stretching of veins in the subdural space..
 Associated muscle weakness but no confusion or seizures.
 This is the not the case with
 Commonly presents with optic neuritis. Mean age of onset is 30 years, female preponderance.
Examination findings supporting a diagnosis of stroke relate to the distribution of the affected artery. Cerebral hemisphere infarcts may cause contralateral hemiplegia which is initially flaccid then spastic, contralateral sensory loss and dysphasia. Brainstem infarcts have widespread effects including quadriplegia and disturbances of vision and gaze. Lacunar infarcts affecting the basal ganglia, internal capsule, thalamus and pons may cause pure motor or sensory signs, a mixture of both or ataxia.
An elderly man who appeared relatively comfortable at rest. He was not obviously short of breath, cyanosed nor jaundiced. He was fully conscious, cooperative and talked with some difficulty throughout the interview.
 Findings from the history and examination supporting diagnosis of stroke (ischaemic type) affecting the cerebreal hemispheres - TACI are:
Symptoms of focal neurological deficit e.g. weakness of limbs on the left side, slurred speech.
Symptoms greater than 24 hours in duration.
Ischaemic strokes often occur at night as here. Onset wasn't after exertion and unassociated with loss of consciousness as is typical of haemorrhagic stroke.
Forehead sparing - with upper motor neurone lesions where the lesion is between the contralateral cerberal cortex and the pons, the muscles of the upper part of the face (especially frontalis with function of raising the eyebrow and furrowing the brow) may be spared. This is because lower motor neurones to this part of the face are bilaterally innervated by corticopontine fibres.
Symptoms of TACI - higher cerebral dysfunction e.g. dysphasia and motor/sensory deficit in left arm and leg.
Stroke refers to a syndrome consisting of rapidly developing symptoms and signs of loss of focal CNS function. Symptoms may develop over usually seconds or minutes. A stroke by definition is associated with symptoms lasting 24 hours or more or leading to death. Pathological mechanisms affecting vasculature resulting in stroke are classified as either infarction (embolic or thromboembolic) or haemorrhagic.
A stroke may be distinguished from a transient ischaemic attack as this refers a focal neurological deficit of less than 24 hours duration. Transient episodes lasting longer than 24 hours from which an individual recovers completely are termed reversible ischaemic neurological deficits.
Thrombosis of cerebral arteries or veins resulting in stroke can be caused by abnormality in individual or any combination of the components of Virchow's triad:
Infarcted tissue causes oedema and associated swelling. Room for expansion within the skull is limited; any condition which causes an increase in volume within the skull cavity will cause an increase in intracranial pressure or shift one brain component thus compressing others. As intracranial pressure increases, the brain shifts or is distorted compressing neurons, nerve tracts and cerebral arteries. A sustained increase in pressure will cause persistent ischaemia and irreversible damage to the above structures.
As described above the most common type of stroke is infarctive, arising typically from degenerative arterial disease either of larger vessels - atherosclerosis (with consequent thromboembolism) or small vessels (lipohyalinosis). The probability of developing significant atherosclerotic disease is increased by the following risk factors:
Annual UK incidence of stroke is 2 per 1000 population, accounting for the third most common cause of death in the UK. 80% of strokes are of infarctive origin.
 He is able only to walk a matter of 30 yards before having to stop and catch his breath and is virtually unable to climb stairs. He is frightened by his recurrent strokes, when they will happen and the resulting effect.
 The psychological impact of decreasing independence shouldn't be underestimated. He appeared frustrated at the current limitations on his ability for independent living.
 He was relieved as to the explanation concerning his current condition and felt he had been fully informed regarding his rehabilitation and the treatment he is receiving. Factors adversely affecting his prognosis and contributing to long-term disability include the development of: pressure sores, epilepsy, recurrent falls and fractures, depression and spasticity with pain, contractures and frozen shoulder. Discharge is to be discussed once nutrition is sorted.
Aims for treatment of Concerning the management of stroke:
 Thrombolysis does however, significantly increase the risk of death from intracranial haemorrhage in the first 7-10 days post-infarct or risk of death after 1-6 months
 2 large randomised controlled trials have produced indirect evidence that should an ischaemic stroke be suspected and CT scan immediately unavailable then administration of aspirin should not be delayed
 However, evidence from systematic reviews has been insufficient in comparing such effects of lowering blood pressure versus placebo
The National Service Framework for Older people was published as a guide to the treatment of Older people in the UK today. It has 5 aims, (i) to eradicate age discrimination in the health service, (ii) to provide person-centred care which is importantly (iii) intermediate and (iv) in a General Hospital environment and (v) to promote health and activity in older people This framework strategy sets measurable goals to be achieved within set-time frames and as such should be incorporated into routine practice.
Full, informed consent for all diagnostic and treatment proceedures is essential for all patients but especially so for an elderly individual such as His diagnosis and crucially prognosis should be clearly and fully explained. A diagnosis of stroke for example carries a variable prognosis. He had realised his speech and motor function had been affected and was concerned as to how these would recover. He was realistic about an expected lifespan. This case highlights the ethical principles of autonomy, beneficence and non-maleficience. Type, duration and whether or not to accept treatment should be his decision.
Clearly, in this case the presenting symptoms required secondary specialist hospital based care. Manipulation of his treatment regime in order to extend the time to re-infarct must be explained to him in a format he is able to understand and absorb. Facilitating patient involvement in continued rehabilitation on discharge has diffuse future healthcare implications. For example, encouraging and actively involving a patient in the management of their disability e.g. continuing physiotherapy exercises at home, taking regular medication and offering smoking-cessation support can help with acceptance of a disability state and alleviate resource strains on the NHS. Patients from a stable family background and with social support respond best to treatment. His family could contribute towards care and as such should be involved in his treatment and diagnosis. Currently evidence concerning the impact of family/social support in the rehabilitation of patients on hospital discharge and the 'critical time window' in which rehabilitation is most effective is limited and is clearly an area to address with future research.