is a 49 year old hypertensive with a 6 month history of fatigue, shorteness of breath and leg swelling. She presented at the  as an elective admission for renal biopsy on the .
Myocardial Infarction. A reasonable diagnosis as chest pain was crushing and described as "like a band stretched across the chest". The most severe episode of pain came on at rest in bed, lasted for a period of 1 hour and was unrelievable. This description is characteristic of that associated with myocardial infarction as opposed to that of angina pectoris which is typically precipitated by exercise, anxiety or fear, relatively short-lived and can be relieved by rest or nitrates . In addition, the pain radiated down the left arm and was associated with sweating, shortness of breath and nausea at the time of onset.  has suffered recurrent NSTEMI, he has inoperable multiple coronary artery disease and it is reasonable to assume this is a further such infarct.
A middle-aged man who appeared short of breath. He was receiving oxygen at 2 L/min via a nasal cannula and was not obviously cyanosed nor jaundiced. He was cannulated, fully conscious, cooperative and talked expressively though became breathless on changing position in bed.
Myocardial Infarction. Findings from the history and examination which support this diagnosis are:
Pain severe in nature
Pain of more than 30 minutes duration
Pain was described as 'crushing and tight' in nature with associated radiation to the left arm, sweating and breathlessness.
The chest pain came on at rest and was not relieved by GTN spray or rest.
Such a diagnosis can be confirmed from electrocardiogram tracings and levels of cardiac enzymes such as troponin T. Myocardial infarction may be divided into ST elevation and non-ST elevation (NSTEMI) types. In NSTEMI infarction, necrosis is confined to the sub-endocardial tissue. NSTEMI is a diagnosis made several hours after a patient presents with chest pain. Such a diagnosis is dependent frequently on identifying cardiac muscle trauma through serial blood levels of cardiac enzymes such as troponin T over the 8-12 hour period post-infarction. Sub-endocardial infarcts are associated with a good intial prognosis, incidence of cardiac failure and death is less than with transmural infarcts. Risk of subsequent arrythmias and reinfarction as with  is however higher. Risk factors contributing to myocardial infarction as seen in this case include hypertension, hypercholesterolaemia, diabetes, smoking, and positive family history.
Acute myocardial infarction refers to cell death secondary to ischaemia. Reduction in the diameter of coronary arteries as a result of atherosclerotic deposition is the most common cause. Rupture of such an atherosclerotic plaque and the subsequent formation of thrombus over the rupture site or haemorrhage within an atheromatous plaque results in rapid occlusion of the vessel. Acute myocardial infarction is the most serious of a range of clinical conditions resulting from plaque rupture. Degree of severity of such conditions is determined by both the rate of vessel occlusion and also the degee of such occlusion. Acute myocardial infarction accounts for one of the most common causes of mortality worldwide accounting for approximately 6.3 million deaths in 1990. Of the 900000 people in the USA who experience a myocardial infarct each year, 225000 die.
Physical: 's progressive ischaemic heart disease and heart failure have inevitably impacted significantly on his physical exertive capacity. He is able only to walk a matter of 30 yards before having to stop and catch his breath and is virtually unable to climb stairs. He is able to sleep relatively comfortably at night when free from chest pain. He is frightened by his recurrent heart attacks, when they will happen, their resolution and has little idea when an attack is imminent. He has yet to come to terms with the reduction his health has placed on his physical capacity.
Psychological:  has experienced repeated episodes of myocardial infarction with increasing frequency between episodes. The psychological impact of what he described as 'waiting for the next' shouldn't be underestimated. In addition, he has been told that his heart disease is inoperable, a state he did not appear to have really accepted at the time of interview. He appeared fairly angry at the limitations his cardiac function place on his live and his ability for independent living.
Social:  has a close relationship with his wife, a crucial source of support in his future care. He also maintains regular contact with local friends.
is uncertain as to his discharge date. He was relieved as to the explanation concerning his current infarction and felt he had been fully informed regarding his condition and the treatment he is receiving. Recent blood tests show a stabilisation in his renal function and no emergence of arrythmias or emboli following his NSTEMI.
Aims for treatment of  are to (i) relieve pain, (ii) restore/optimise blood supply to the heart, (iii) reduce incidence of complications, (iv) prevent or reduce frequency of recurrent ischaemia and infarction, (v) reduce mortality and (vi) minimise the side-effects associated with medication. Concerning the management of acute NSTEMI:
Aspirin: Systematic review evidence has shown that aspirin reduces mortality, reinfarction and stroke at 1 month post-infarct when compared to placebo 1. Regarding harm, no significant difference was found in rates of cerebral haemorrhage or those bleeds requiring transfusion between the two treatment options.
-blockers: both systematic review and randomised controlled trial evidence has shown that -blockers produce a reduction in mortality than when compared with placebo. Metoprolol for example, if administered immediately reduces rates of reinfarction and chest pain 6 days post-infarct compared to if treatment is delayed but has no significant effect on mortality at either 6 days or 1 year 2.
ACEIs: Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors have been shown to reduce mortality 6 weeks post-infarct when compared with placebo if administered within 14 days of acute myocardial infarction. However caution is required in individuals such as , as they may increase renal dysfunction or persistent hypotension 3.
Nitrates: Evidence concerning efficacy of nitrates is conflicting. For those with acute myocardial infarction prior to thrombolysis, nitrates have been shown to reduce mortality when compared to placebo. Randomised controlled trial evidence however, in the same circumstance, no significant difference between nitrates and placebo 4.
Eplerenone: systematic trial evidence has shown that in patients with severe heart failure the addition of eplerenone (aldosterone receptor antagonist) to standard medical treatment including ACEI, angiotensin receptor antagonists, diuretics and -blockers decreases mortality when compared to placebo.
When compared with thrombolysis, primary percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty has been shown to reduce mortality, non-fatal re-infarction and stroke 5. Early invasive cardiac revascularisation providing the distal grafts are in adequate condition as is unfortunately not the case for SB reduces mortality at both 6 and 12 months post-infarct when compared with medical treatment alone in those individuals who have developed cardiogenic shock within 48 hours of acute myocardial infarction 6.
The National Service Framework for Coronary Heart Disease 2000 7 was published as a guide to the treatment of heart disease in the UK today. Of relevance to heart attacks are the following aims, (i) people should receive defibrillation from a trained individual within 8 minutes of calling for help if required, (ii) those individuals thought to be suffering from a MI should be assessed professionally and if required receive aspirin, (iii) each NHS trust should put in place agreed protocols so that appropriate assessment may be offered to an individual and treatment of proven clinical and cost effectiveness, decreasing the risk of disability and death.
Clearly, in this case the presenting acute myocardial infarction required secondary specialist hospital based care. Chronic, heart disease can however be effectively managed with hospital direction (i.e. specialist heart failure and cardiology input) in the community/primary care setting incorporating a multidisciplinary led team care approach.  is extremely anxious about the possibiltity of having further infarctions. Manipulation of his treatment regime in order to extend the time to re-infarct must be explained to him in a format he is able to understand and absorb. Facilitating the self-management of heart disease has diffuse future healthcare implications. For example, helping a patient 'take ownership' of their disease e.g. taking regular blood pressure readings and offering smoking-cessation support can help with acceptance of a chronic disease and alleviate resource strains on the NHS. Patients from a stable family background and with social support respond best to treatment. His family could contribute towards care and as such should be involved in his treatment and diagnosis. 's health needs to be optimised to enable him to maximise independence and quality of life.
Currently evidence concerning the use of positive inotropes such as dobutamine, pulmonary artery catheterisation, ventricular assistance devices and cardiac transplantation in the management of acute myocardial infarction is limited 8 and is clearly an area to address with future research.