was admitted to  Hospital on the  for arthroscopic subacromial decompression of the right shoulder with minor open rotator cuff repair and distal clavicular resection. This was performed on the same day. He has a long-standing history of right shoulder pain and impaired movement. He has suffered from ME for 8 years and as a consequence has had to take early retirement through ill health.
Incomplete tear of the tendinous (rotator) cuff. This injury commonly affects individuals of 's age particularly males; very occasionally is a younger patient affected. The most common cause of a rotator cuff tear is for it to give way under a sudden strain. For , the tendon may well have weakened due to age-related degeneration and the long-term, repetitive, heavy-lifting inherent to warehouse work and was thus predisposed to tear when subjected to additional stress such as that involved in the DIY he was carrying out at the time of injury. The tear is mainly of degenerate fibres of the relatively avascular supraspinatus tendon occurring near its insertion, but may extend into the adjacent subscapularis or infraspinatus tendons. Additional involvement of the capsule is also common. Tearing causes an inflammatory reaction with local swelling as seen with . Such an injury is a cause of painful arc or supraspinatus syndrome, characterised by shoulder and upper arm pain during the mid-range 70-120 of arm abduction as for . Severity of pain is reduced at extremes of the range of abduction.
Differential diagnoses:
Complete tear of rotator cuff - serious impairment of power and ability to abduct the shoulder and power.
'Frozen' shoulder - characteristic severe aching pain in the shoulder and upper arm, typically of gradual onset. However, there is normally uniform limitation of all gleno-humeral movements. Abduction is most significantly impaired for .
Osteoarthritis of the acromioclavicular joint - uncommon in the shoulder due to its non-weightbearing function. Affected individuals are generally elderly however, does present with shoulder pain radiating to the upper arm as for . In acromio-clavicular arthritis pain begins past 90 abduction and increases rather than decreases as the full extent of elevation is reached.
Rheumatoid Arthritis - the shoulder is commonly affected by rheumatoid arthritis. Principal clinical features are local pain, stiffness and impairment of movement as seen in this patient. Unlikely cause however as  has no history of rheumatoid arthritis. Often both shoulders are affected simultaneously with additional involvement of other upper limb joints.
Muscular neck pain - however pain of such a type does not radiate to the upper arm.
Findings to be looked for on physical examination to confirm diagnosis of an incomplete rotator cuff tear are:
Local tenderness below the margin of the acromion.
Active movement - when attempts to abduct the arm, there is no movement at the glenohumeral joint with a complete rotator cuff tear, 45-60 of abduction can be achieved entirely by scapular movement. In incomplete tears or painful arc syndrome power of abduction is retained but movement is painful.
Contrastingly, there is a full range of passive movement.
Swelling - indicative of an inflammatory process or resulting from synovial thickening.
Crepitus on movement - loss of hyaline cartilage, reduction in joint space as seen in osteoarthritis.
AP radiological examination is of most benefit in differentiating between the various causes of painful arc syndrome other than rotator cuff tears such as calcified deposits or fractures of the greater tuberosity. X-rays are generally only necessary for persistent rotator cuff tendonitis or when the diagnosis is uncertain. MRI scanning and ultrasound imaging techniques can be utilised to assist in clarifying a diagnosis.
is a middle-aged male who appeared relatively comfortable but of fairly low mood at the time of interview. There were no obvious signs of pallor, cyanosis or jaundice. He was not cannulated or using respiratory or mobility aids. He was fully conscious, cooperative and talked expressively and freely.
Incomplete tear of the tendinous (rotator) cuff. The rotator cuff is comprised of the tendons of supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres minor and subscapularis muscles and forms a musculotendinous cuff for the glenohumeral joint. Tonic muscular contraction holds the humeral head in the glenoid cavity of the scapula, stabilising the glenohumeral joint. Frequent microtrauma of the shoulder joint such as that resulting from heavy lifting and stretching as required in  previous occupation can cause injury and tearing of the rotator cuff. Tenderness over the bicipital groove on examination is typically attributed to frictional irritation of the long tendon of biceps but can also be associated with degeneration of the rotator cuff as is the case for .
The pattern on impairment of abduction can be explained as follows. The first 90 of abduction occurs at the glenohumeral joint involving first contraction of supraspinatus achieving 0-30 and then of deltoid effecting 30-90 abduction. Beyond 90 requires rotation of the scapula produced by contraction of trapezius. The painful arc of movement observed particularly between 5-80 occurs when the inflamed area of the supraspinatus tendon (in the proximity of the tear) comes into contact with the undersurface of the acromion. Adduction is unaffected as it is principally achieved by pectoralis major and lattisimus dorsi. Reduction of both internal and external rotation can be explained in part by spasm and stiffness resulting from chronic inflammation and pain. External rotation is impaired to a greater degree than internal rotation as it is accomplished by infraspinatus, which was clearly wasted in  whereas internal rotation is achieved by pectoralis major, latissimus dorsi and deltoid, muscles appearing to be unaffected.
Causative factors associated with rotator cuff disorders:
Excessive overloading - contributory factor for , cumulative, repetitive shoulder stress
Cuff degeneration with ageing - imaging study evidence for  of arthritic degeneration of acromioclavicular joint
Cuff degeneration with ischaemia
Anatomical features e.g. narrow coracoacromial arch, hooked acromion
Instability of the glenohumeral and acromioclavicular joints
Musculoskeletal disease resulting in wasting of the cuff muscles
is a middle-aged gentleman admitted for elective shoulder surgery. He was understandably in significant pain at the time of interview and very anxious about his impeding surgery and the damage he had done to his shoulder.
Physical:
has experienced progressive deterioration in mobility of his shoulder and right arm and increasing amounts of pain. He has wasting of the musculature of his right shoulder and as such has reduced power of abduction and external rotation. Difficulty performing tasks such as carrying shopping, dressing himself and brushing his hair has meant  has lost a significant amount of his independence, something he attributes great importance to.  is at present able to drive and keen to continue doing so.
Psychological:
The psychological impact of enduring chronic progressively increasing intensity of orthopaedic pain must not be underestimated. The pain and associated reduction in mobility and independence has caused  to become sufficiently depressed to warrant antidepressant medication. His depression and efficacy of treatment must be closely monitored to optimise prognosis and compliance with treatment and rehabilitation. Anxiety concerning his musculoskeletal injury is compounded by the psychological 'ill-effects' resulting from long-standing chronic fatigue syndrome. He must receive support from an appropriate specialist in both addressing and alleviating this anxiety.
Social:
has a close relationship with his wife and receives extensive support from her. She will continue to provide care for her husband on his hospital discharge. Additional support is provided by a few close local friends. External support crucially must be encouraged and maintained both during the hospital stay and future rehabilitation to optimise prognosis.  may benefit from further social interaction in the form of clubs e.g. cycling or gardening (past interests) on discharge and membership should be both encouraged and facilitated.
was able to take both fluids and solids the night of surgery () and returned to a normal dietary intake the day after surgery (). He was comfortable the morning following surgery whilst on 4-hourly painkillers but became progressively more uncomfortable and dizzy when they were "wearing off". He in fact fainted twice early on the morning of the  in the bathroom and attributed this to "feeling hot and perhaps standing too quickly". Following this, there was no further loss of consciousness, headache or feelings of dizziness. He was to be discharged that afternoon after lunch providing he was pain-free on oral analgesia, able to weight-bear, mobilise and manage stairs safely.
On discharge  should receive urgent physiotherapy to permit passive mobilisation of his shoulder for the first 6 weeks following surgery and then gentle assisted mobilisation for 2 further weeks. He should be followed up as an outpatient at 3 weeks, then 8 weeks following surgery and then at regular intervals for a year. Success of arthroscopic rotator cuff tear repair surgery is excellent however the progressive degenerative process of osteoarthritis in this gentleman must be acknowledged. He has radiological evidence of reduction in the acromioclavicular joint space and involvement of the knee joints also, which will progressively deteriorate further with age. He should be made aware of the referral route from his GP to orthopaedic secondary services should he feel increasing joint pain becomes a pressing issue in the future.
Shoulder pain is that arising in or around the shoulder from either the glenohumeral, acromioclavicular, sternoclavicular, subacromial or scapulothoracic joints and surrounding soft tissues. Pain is the most common presenting symptom of any sort of shoulder pathology. Evidence regarding efficacy of analgesia in the shoulder is extremely limited and certainly an area to address with future research. No systematic reviews or randomised controlled trials have looked at the effects of either topical or intra-articular administration of NSAIDs or that of paracetamol or opiates in people with shoulder pain. One RCT found no significant reduction in pain between oral NSAIDs such as diclofenac or naproxen when compared to placebo 1. Evidence for such interventions is thought to be limited by a lack of standardised approaches, the diverse nature of disorders encompassed under the title of shoulder pain and huge variation in the types of NSAIDs used.
There is insufficient evidence comparing efficacy of inarticular corticosteroid injections +/- local anaesthetic or physiotherapy with placebo or physiotherapy alone. One small RCT found no significance difference in either pain score or change in function/mobility achieved after 3 weeks treatment with injections of triamcinolone versus saline 2. Future research should focus on increasing trial size (reducing error factor), and optimising accuracy of injection with techniques such as ultrasound or fluroscopy as evidence suggests clinical outcome is associated with accuracy of injection.
Physiotherapy in the form of a supervised exercise regime in addition to providing advice regarding pain management has been found to improve both pain and shoulder function when compared to placebo at intervals of 6 months and 2.5 years following rotator cuff injury 3. Laser treatment is a useful adjunct and has been shown to improve pain and speed recovery compared to placebo. Its efficacy in a chronic injury such as that of  is uncertain however 4. Surgical intervention such as arthroscopic decompression with post-operative physiotherapy improves pain and shoulder joint function when compared to placebo 5. Future research is required to establish comparative efficacy of arthroscopic laser subacromial decompression. Multidisciplinary biopsychosocial rehabilitation incorporating physiotherapy, surgery, psychological, behavioural and educational interventions has been proposed as a treatment method for achieving an improved range of movement and function in rotator cuff disease 6. Systemic review evidence for such an intervention is of poor quality however for reasons such as dissimilar treatment groups at baseline and not ensuring blinding of therapists. This rehabilitative approach should clearly be addressed in the future.
Each year, approximately 1% of UK adults over the age of 45 present to primary care with new onset shoulder pain 7. Prevalence is estimated at between 4-20%. Various community studies have shown shoulder pain to have higher frequency in women but age distribution is unclear 8. Development of chronic pain is common and typically requires referral to secondary care services. 's case is complicated by the co-existing chronic fatigue syndrome characterised by disabling fatigue with additional symptoms of musculoskeletal pain and headaches, 2 of his presenting symptoms. Careful examination is required to differentiate symptoms of musculoskeletal and functional/psychosomatic disease. The psychological impact of managing his chronic, severe pain has clearly resulted in a clinical depression, which has been additionally influenced by his chronic fatigue syndrome. Whilst his current surgery will go some way to improving his mental state, by restoring function and reducing pain it is essential  receives treatment from a specialist clinic for his chronic fatigue as depression and anxiety will have detrimental impact on prognosis. Outcome of chronic fatigue syndrome is poor without treatment and influenced by duration of disease, co-morbid mood disorders (his depression), increasing age and conviction that the illness is physical ('s was "brought on by a virus, I've never been the same since).
's case highlights the practice of patients receiving treatment at any hospital within a trust. His outpatient consultations, pre-operative investigations and treatment have been performed at the  hospital but he was able to receive his surgery at . Referral to different hospitals within a trust can speed up treatment, thus decreasing waiting lists and optimising delivery of patient care.
Patients from a stable family background and with social support respond best to treatment. His wife should be encouraged to continue supporting her husband but also facilitate a gradual increase in his physical activity once recovered from his shoulder surgery. Challenging the illness behaviour that develops in chronic fatigue syndrome is essential in optimising prognosis. Maximising additional, external social interaction should be encouraged and facilitated.