He had a 3 year history of a mole on the right shoulder blade which had been progressively increasing in size with intermittent, spontaneous bleeding.
Malignant melanoma of either of the following two types.
Nodular malignant melanoma - most aggressive type. Presents as a rapidly growing pigmented nodule which bleeds or ulcerates. Rarely are non-pigmented/amelanotic and can mimic pyogenic granuloma.
Superficial spreading malignant melanoma - a flat, irregularly pigmented lesion, large in size. Grows laterally before vertical invasion develops.
Benign naevus
The following clinical criteria are an aid in distinguishing between the above differential diagnoses.
The Glasgow 7-point checklist
To support the most likely presenting diagnosis of malignant melanoma Of the minor criteria, his mole measures more than 6mm and it bleeds spontaneously on regular occasions.
History of sun exposure in childhood and intermittent exposure in adulthood are particularly important aetiological factors in the development of malignant melanoma. Other predisposing factors include atypical mole syndrome, giant congenital melanocytic naevi, lentigo maligna and positive family history of malignant melanoma. Malignant melanoma is commoner in later life but can affect younger individuals. Incidence is continuing to increase due to excessive exposure to sunlight.
A middle-aged gentleman who appeared fit and non-septic. He was not obviously jaundiced. He was cannulated and had no respiratory or mobility aids around his bedside.
Histological analysis determines both the thickness of the tumour (Breslow thickness) and the depth of invasion (Clarke's level). Both these factors aid in predicting prognosis and 5 year survival rates.
Physical-:
Psychological-:
Social-:
 He was relieved as to his diagnosis and felt he had been fully informed regarding his condition and the treatment he received. He does not need to attend a urology outpatient appointment and should receive further cystoscopic examination in the future should his symptoms return.
Both government and medical personnel have a role to play in the management of malignant melanoma. Public health education should discourage sunbathing and encourage widespread use of the appropriate factor suncream.
Transitional cell tumours account for about 3% of deaths from all causes of malignancy. Painless, frank haematuria is commonly the presenting symptom of bladder cancer and is an 'alarm' symptom warranting an urgent 2 week referral from a primary care setting (GP) to secondary care (hospital) for further investigation.
A diagnosis of bladder cancer is made by cystoscopy and should cancer be found regular cystoscopic screening is advised to monitor future occurrence of neoplastic growth. Clearly the earlier the diagnosis, the sooner treatment can be started and the better the prognosis for the patient. The prognosis of bladder cancer ranges from a 5-year survival of 80-90% for lesions not involving bladder muscle to 5% for those invasive cancers with metastatic spread.
Patients from a stable family background and with social support respond best to treatment. His family could contribute towards care and as such should be involved in his treatment and diagnosis.