presented at A + E on the  with symptoms of increasing shortness of breath. She had been feeling 'unwell' for the few days prior to presentation. She has a longstanding history of asthma; her current dyspnoea was however unresponsive to the regular inhalers and nebulisers she uses at home.
Given 's long-standing history of asthma, the most likely cause of her current presenting symptoms is an acute exacerbation of her asthma. Dyspnoea was relatively acute in onset and variable in nature ruling out obstructive causes such as malignancy.
Asthma is a common inflammatory condition of the airways, characterised by 3 pathological processes:
airflow limitation - usually reversible spontaneously or with treatment
airway hyperresponsiveness - to a wide range of stimuli e.g. cold air, exercise, emotions.
bronchial inflammation - involves mast cells, eosinophils, macrophages and lymphocytes.
Inflammation results in remodelling of both bronchiolar structure and function. This remodelling in addition to alteration in smooth muscle contractility causes bronchial hyperresponsivity. Remodelling is achieved by a number of factors, (i) epithelium of conducting airways is damaged with loss of ciliated columnar cells onto the lumen, (ii) thickened basement membrane, (iii) hyperplasia of the helical bands of airways smooth muscle, (iv) central and peripheral neural reflexes contribute to enhancing airway irritability.
Symptoms, which may be found, include cough, wheeze, chest tightness and shortness of breath.  presents with all these. Her asthma is on occasions worse at night as can often be the case. Asthmatic individuals may demonstrate symptoms of airflow limitation almost identical to those of COPD. These are cough, wheeze, breathlessness and tachypnoea. Dyspnoea in asthma is typically intermittent and variable in nature, which contrasts with the constant dyspnoea seen in COPD. Findings to be looked for on physical examination include tachypnoea, an audible wheeze, hyperinflated chest, hyperresonant percussion, decreased air entry and widespread, polyphonic wheeze.
Differential diagnosis for 's dyspnoea:
Pulmonary oedema - unlikely as although presents with acute dyspnoea and wheezing does not have a cough producing characteristic frothy, blood tinged sputum. There is no indication of peripheral circulatory shutdown from the history either.
Large airway obstruction e.g. tumour - unlikely, dyspnoea had relatively acute onset and variable nature.
Pneumothorax - does present with progressively increasing breathlessness as here but there is no associated unilateral pleuritic pain as would be expected. Look for tracheal and mediastinal shift.
Superior vena cava obstruction - unlikely no indication of venous congestion or stridor.
Bronchiectasis - no production of yellow/green sputum. Does present with malaise however.
An elderly lady who appeared comfortable when sitting and non-septic. She was not obviously jaundiced. She was cannulated, had a nasal cannula in situ and a nebuliser at her bedside.  was fully conscious, cooperative and was able to talk expressively and freely at the time of interview. She had however, been unable to complete sentences whilst in A+E and subsequently MAU.
Acute exacerbation of Chronic Asthma. Findings on examination that support this diagnosis are:
Tachypnoea - respiratory rate > 25 breaths per minute
Tachycardia - > 110 bpm
PEFR < 50% of predicted normal or best
Inability to complete sentences on presentation at A+E
An audible wheeze, hyperinflated chest and decreased air entry. Hyperinflation of the chest is seen in states of chronic airflow limitation such as chronic asthma.
Absence of cyanosis at presentation at A+E - important as cyanosis is a feature of a life-threatening attack.
Her dyspnoea was acute in onset and then worsened progressively in severity.
Dyspnoea was variable in nature.
The presenting cough is a frequent symptom associated with asthma. It can commonly be misdiagnosed as bronchitis, careful investigation is required for clarification. The tremor observed in the patient's hands and fingers is most likely caused by stimulation of  receptors in skeletal muscle by bronchodilator drugs e.g. Salbutamol. It can be distinguished from CO 2 retention as found in chronic airflow limitation by absence of warm peripheries, bounding pulses or headache.
Asthma can be divided into extrinsic (atopic) or intrinsic types. Asthma is an atopic disorder, which may run in families as is the case for . Atopic individuals (30-40% of the UK population) have IgE antibodies against common environmental materials. Association between serum IgE level, prevalence of asthma and airway responsiveness to histamine and methacholine has been shown.
Inhalation of an allergen in an atopic individual such as , compounded by a possible concomitant respiratory infection will have led to the following reactive process.
Immediate asthma (early reaction) - airflow limitation occurs within minutes of exposure, reaches max. within 15-20 minutes and can subside within an hour.
Late phase reaction -  developed a more prolonged and sustained airflow limitation which was unresponsive to her regular bronchodilator medication
Late phase reaction associated with increase in airway hyperreactivity causing  to experience episodes of asthma on subsequent days as seen.
Physical-:  suffers with chronic asthma, which presents with acute episodes several times a year. She is terrified by her attacks as she cannot control when they will happen, their duration and resolution and indeed has no indication at all of when an attack is imminent.  has had to come to terms with losing some of her physical independence, as she is unable to walk far when particularly wheezy. She also has osteoporosis and is concerned that she may incur fractures with little or no precipitating trauma.
Psychological-: She is highly intelligent and expressive and finds it hard to accept her current physical ability and independence do not match her level of mental independence.
Social-: She has extensive social input from family and maintains contact with some local friends.
Peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) on the  was 150L; still below her normal range of 250-300L. Peak flow rate varies considerably between individuals with sex, age and height. PEFR measures expiratory flow in the first 2ms of expiration only, overestimating lung function in individuals with moderate airflow limitation. PEFR is best used therefore to monitor disease progression and its treatment rather than airflow limitation. Clearly, peak flow needs to be restored towards her normal levels prior to discharge to optimise prognosis. At the ward round on the same day, she was comfortable and feeling 'better than when she first came in'. CRP was less than 10mg/L indicating resolution of infection.
The evidence base for the management of asthma is vast. As  is presenting with an acute exacerbation of her asthma, I have chosen to focus as such on this aspect here. Aims of treatment for  are to (i) minimise or eliminate symptoms, (ii) maximise lung function, (iii) prevent further exacerbations, (iv) minimise side-effects associated with medication and (v) provide sufficient information to enable her to manage her asthma effectively herself. Concerning the management of acute asthma:
Inhaled corticosteroids: systematic review evidence has shown that inhaled corticosteroids administered in A+E significantly reduce admission rates when compared to placebo 1. No significant difference was found between the efficacy of inhaled plus oral corticosteroid versus oral corticosteroid in either the same setting or in preventing relapse within a 24-day period.
Short acting 2 agonists: hospital admission rates have been shown in systematic reviews to be equally affected by both continuous and intermittent short acting 
2 agonists when delivered via a nebuliser 2. Intravenous administration has also been shown to have no significantly different effect on either hospital admission rates or peak expiratory flow readings.
Ipratropium bromide: the addition of Ipratropium bromide to a 
2 agonist such as salbutamol significantly improves FEV 1 over a period of 90 minutes compared to salbutamol alone and in addition significantly reduces hospital admission rates 3. This data can only be supported by 2 further randomised controlled trials, as these were the only ones, which reported their data in sufficient detail to be included in analysis of hospital admission rates. This is certainly an area to be addressed in future clinical research. Areas for future research also include the use of oxygen supplementation and mechanical ventilation in the management of acute asthma as there is no published randomised controlled trial evidence concerning this.
Specialist versus generalist care: limited evidence suggests that outcomes in those individuals with severe asthma may be improved with specialist rather than generalised care. Parameters measuring improvement include number waking at night, those suffering relapse requiring emergency hospital admission within 6 months and the number suffering multiple relapses. These same individuals were however more likely to receive inhales corticosteroids and sodium cromoglycate. Mortality in medical intensive care units is higher than in general care but accounts for less than 3% of hospital admissions 4.
Education: facilitating disease self-management by providing specialist education concerning asthma has been found by a number of randomised controlled trials to reduce further hospital admission rates, doctors appointments (excluding those which are routine) and days off work through illness 5. This has interesting implications for future delivery of healthcare. Reduced admission rates and appointments will help alleviate current financial and resource stresses in the NHS.
Asthma is extremely common and causes considerable morbidity. Prevalence is increasing in the UK particularly in the 2 nd decade of life where between 10-15% of the population are affected 6. Various stimuli either cause or trigger asthma:
Clearly, in this case the presenting exacerbation of asthma required secondary specialist hospital based care. Chronic, stable asthma can however be effectively managed in the community/primary care setting incorporating a multidisciplinary led team care approach.  is greatly concerned and anxious about her asthma and the prospect of having further attacks. Manipulation of her treatment regime in order to minimise the risk of these attacks occurring must be explained to her in a format she is able to understand and absorb. As well as optimising disease control by modifying pharmacotherapy, interventions such as controlling extrinsic factors e.g. dust mites and particular drugs and educating affected individuals and their families can help optimise health outcome and prognosis. Facilitating the self-management of asthma has diffuse future healthcare implications. For example, patient care and healthcare experience could be optimised, helping a patient 'take ownership' of their disease e.g. taking peak flow readings can help with acceptance of a chronic disease and resource strains on the NHS alleviated.
Relapse rate from acute exacerbations of asthma varies between 7-15% depending on how aggressively the patient is treated. Current therapeutic regimens comprising ipratropium, corticosteroids and 2 selective agonists demonstrate suboptimal efficacy. Long-term prognosis following severe, life-threatening attacks is poor, mortality may reach 10%. Clearly, this is an area to address with future research 7.
This case demonstrates ethical controversy inherent with the treatment of chronic diseases such as asthma. Clearly, for  the use of steroid treatment when required in both her acute management and for longer term purposes to achieve maintenance is life saving. However, this same treatment has decreased her bone density causing osteoporosis. She demonstrates radiological evidence of an associated pathological fracture in her ribs largely contributed to by this drug-induced osteoporosis. This highlights the need for continuing future research into optimising drug treatments for asthma. Morbidity and mortality associated with asthma increases with socioeconomic deprivation and ethnicity.