was referred to  Medical Assessment Unit by his General Practitioner (GP) on . The referral was on the basis of abnormal blood results and obvious jaundice in the skin and sclera.
Based on the acute symptoms  presented with, the differential diagnoses of pale diarrhoea with weight loss and painless obstructive jaundice include:
Malignancy - Primary: carcinoma of head of pancreas, cholangiocarcinoma. Secondary: metastases from the colon, stomach, lung or oesophagus.
Alcoholic liver disease - e.g. cirrhosis
Chronic pancreatitis - although this most commonly presents with pain.
Alcoholic hepatitis
A number of features along with jaundice help to suggest underlying pathology and include:
Presence of abdominal pain (particularly right upper quadrant) suggestive of bile duct stones.
Acute onset of abdominal distension with jaundice suggestive of hepatic vein thrombosis or acute hepatitis.
Signs of right ventricular failure (raised JVP, peripheral oedema and a palpable tender liver edge) suggest congestion of the liver with resultant jaundice (+/- liver failure).
These features were not present in , leading to the most likely cause of his presentation of painless obstructive jaundice with weight loss in the older aged population to be carcinoma of the pancreas, cholangiocarcinoma or enlarged metastatic lymph nodes at the porta hepatis.
The physical examination will look for signs of chronic liver disease (spider naevi, palmar erythema, dupretyon's contracture, caput medusae, gynaecomastia, hepatosplenomegaly and ascites), signs of anaemia and generalised lymphadenopathy. A PR examination will rule out the possibility of a prostatic or rectal mass. Palpation of the gall bladder will also indicate a gall bladder obstruction and help determine the presence of gall stones.
On general examination,  was alert, orientated and comfortable at rest. Jaundice was present in the sclera and skin. Capillary refill <2secounds. There were no signs of clubbing, cyanosis or lymphadenopathy. had pale conjunctiva and pallor, indicative of anaemia.
History and examination confirm initial possible causes. There were no signs of chronic liver disease and no palpable gall bladder. According to Courvoisier's Law, if the gall bladder is palpable with painless jaundice, the cause will not be gall stones however, there was too much subcutaneous fat on 's abdomen to palpate the gall bladder effectively if it were inflamed. Therefore a diagnosis involving the gall bladder cannot be ruled out. The bright yellow hue of 's jaundice indicates that his jaundice is acute jaundice. Due to the presence of dark urine and pale stools, we know that  has obstructive jaundice.
Post-hepatic (obstructive) causes of jaundice include:
Physical - Physically,  does not feel too unwell. The lethargy he has been experiencing over the last 2-3 weeks has restricted him in that he has felt too tired to try and do lots of things but he does not feel that he has any physical problems. He stressed that he still feels quite fit and well.
Psychological -  was initially at presentation to MAU very upbeat and did not appear very worried about his jaundice and believed it to be hepatitis related. He did not feel too unwell although his sever diarrhoea was worrying him.  was not aware of the seriousness of his complaint when he was first referred but despite being informed about his diagnosis he remained quite upbeat whilst he was an in-patient. He has a lot of support from his family and has been on weekend leave in between further investigations and treatment.
Social - 
 found his severe diarrhoea prior to admission difficult to deal with. He was restricted to his home because he was having to go to the toilet so often.  has very supportive family and friends who live nearby and who have been visiting him regularly.  is able to take weekend leave from the hospital.
had a confirmed diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma with the use of CT and ERCP. At present he remains jaundice despite the placement of a stent in the right hepatic duct.  has remained an inpatient since . He has been on weekend leave to spend time with his family.  was transferred to the  Hospital on .
Cholangiocarcinomas are adenomas of the bile ducts associated with dense fibrous tissue. They can be intra-hepatic (arising from the bile ducts), central (hilar) or extra-hepatic. Cholangiocarcinomas are uncommon tumours; 8-10% of primary liver tumours. Such malignancies are representative of approximately 1% of all carcinomas (1). As in the case of , the extra-hepatic tumours present with progressive jaundice with associated clinical features of weight loss, malaise and nausea and vomiting. The disease spreads by the local lymphatics of by local extension. The patients with hilar cholangiocarcinoma are frequently elderly in the 6 th or 7 th decade and present with jaundice in more than 90% of cases (2). The jaundice is frequently 'painless' and only around one third of the patients complain of pain in the right upper quadrant. Itching is reported in 30-70% of patients (3). The clinical course is progressive and death from liver failure or cholangitis is in 6 months to 1 year if the biliary obstruction is unrelieved.
To establish the diagnosis and appropriate management in a patient suspected to have hilar cholangiocarcinoma on clinical presentation and initial imaging it is necessary to identify candidates for curative resection and to plan appropriate palliative care for the remaining individuals. The parameters that need further investigation include an assessment of the patient's fitness for undergoing major surgery, the extent of bile duct involvement, the involvement of the common hepatic artery or main portal vein at the hepatic hilum and the lymph nodes and distant metastases. ERCP is required for diagnosis as ultrasound shows features of dilated bile ducts or lesions within the liver parenchyma, which are not specific to cholangiocarcinoma. The prognosis of cholangiocarcinoma is poor and the survival is rarely more than 6 months. The treatment options are limited and usually palliative. Radical resection of the extra-hepatic tumours can offer a cure but this is rare. Symptomatic relief of the jaundice and an improvement in the quality of life is achieved by the insertion of endoprostheses (stent) during ERCP in order to re-establish the flow of bile.
A small proportion of cholangiocarcinoma are surgically resectable but those at the hilar region (as 's was) are less likely to be operable than those in the distal bile duct. The greater proportion of patient treatment is palliative with the response to chemotherapy and radiotherapy being poor. Relief of the bile duct obstruction has been shown to improve quality of life (1) considerably and along with pain control this is the end-point of palliation. The World Health Organisation describes the essence of palliative medicine to involve improve the quality of life of a patient faced with a terminal diagnosis and to provide a relief from any pain and symptoms. Alongside the patient, palliative care should also incorporate the needs of the family and/or the caregiver. In patients in whom the quality of life is preserved or improved a survival benefit is more likely (4), with this in mind, the aims of palliation in unresectable hilar cholangiocarcinoma is to:
1. Provide relief from
2. Prolongation of life with the aim of improving the quality of life.
Important issues raised by this case include issues of health care delivery in the aspects of waiting times for CT scans for individuals with a terminal diagnosis. I found it very surprising that, in a patient where staging and investigation into the extent of his cancer was critical not only to his management but also for himself and his family, that he had to wait almost 2 weeks for a CT scan. It is important to consider how health care is delivered to these individuals and to understand that if at all possible, patients do not, on the whole like to be in hospital any longer than they need to be and in terminal diagnoses this should not be overlooked while individuals have to wait for investigations that they should perhaps get priority for. Other issues of interest involve the delivery of palliative care and the aspect of "breaking bad news" and how and where is a good place to discuss such subjects with the patients and their families.
Importance of acute severe diarrhoea and painless jaundice on presentation.
The need for thorough investigations and continued blood tests.
The importance of medication for the relief of symptoms.
Differential diagnoses of jaundice.
Details of cholangiocarcinoma.
Aspects of management for palliative care.