was referred to 
 Medical Admissions Unit (MAU) on the  from his General Practitioner (GP) due to recurrent chest infections and a reduced response to antibiotics.  had a productive cough that was not improving following three courses of antibiotics.
has previously been diagnosed with Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia (CLL) based upon clinical examination findings, blood results (an increase in lymphocyte count to at least 5x10 9/L) and film investigations.
is being treated for the symptomatic relief of his condition, having undergone a course of chemotherapy. He is being treated with an anti-emetic, an immunosuppressant and a selective-serotonin receptor inhibitor (anti-depressant).  has previously been treated with Chlorambucil, an alkylating drug, commonly used to treat CLL and a common chemotherapy drug. Despite all treatments,  has had a steadily increasing WCC and bone marrow failure with a transfusion dependency and has been suffering from recurrent respiratory infections over the last year.
The most likely single cause of the presentation is therefore a respiratory tract infection, unresolved by oral antibiotics, secondary to a reduced immune response due to CLL and marrow failure +/-chemotherapy. The differential diagnoses for this presentation still need to be considered.
These include:
Pleural effusion. Fluid in the pleural space, this can be exudate in origin, which is mostly due to increased leakiness of pleural capillaries secondary to infection, inflammation or malignancy. This can be caused by pneumonia, TB, pulmonary infarction or malignant metastases. The symptoms of pleural effusions dyspnoea, pleuritic chest pain or it can be asymptomatic.
Bronchial carcinoma. The symptoms of which include cough (80%), haemoptysis (70%), dyspnoea (60%), recurrent or slowly resolving pneumonia, anorexia and weight loss.
Pulmonary tuberculosis. This can be silent or cause a cough, sputum, pneumonia, pleurisy, haemoptysis or pleural effusion.
Pulmonary Embolus. CLL results in polycythaemia (high white cell count) which causes a hypercoagulable state. This predisposes to pulmonary embolus and hence shortness of breath.
Recurrent pneumonia. Secondary to bronchial compression from enlarged metastatic lymph nodes, as a result of CLL.
On physical examination I will look for signs of a fever (tachycardia, sweating, confusion), cyanosis, tachypnoea, hypotension, signs of consolidation (diminished expansion, dull percussion note, increased tactile vocal fremitus, bronchial breathing) and a pleural rub.
On general examination,  was alert, orientated and breathless at rest. There were no signs of jaundice, clubbing, cyanosis, oedema or lymphadenopathy.  had pale conjunctiva and pallor, indicative of anaemia.
has been becoming progressively more debilitated by his CLL and has had recurrent respiratory infections over the last year with a steadily increasing WCC and bone marrow failure. He has had regular courses of augmentin and is continuing to suffer with infection. Despite medical therapy,  is suffering from a progressive disease that is now not responding to treatment, including a course of chlorambucil and fludarabine. 's recurrent respiratory infections are a result of both his disease and the treatment he has undergone, and coupled with his age,  is highly susceptible to infections.
's signs on examination (tachypnoea, tachycardia, basal crackles and an expiratory wheeze) all indicate that he has contracted another respiratory tract infection. 's splenomegaly is an indication that his CLL is quite advanced.
At this stage it is important to investigate 's blood results (get a blood culture, mid-stream urine and sputum culture), arterial blood gases and order a chest X-ray to look for areas of consolidation, multilobar infiltrates, cavitation and pleural effusion in order to confirm diagnosis.
Physical - Prior to 's diagnosis of CLL in , he had been a healthy man with no other medical problems. However, since his diagnosis, he says he has been finding it progressively more difficult to carry out the tasks and jobs he used to manage and is relying on the help of his partner to help him.  has found his recurrent respiratory infections leave him very breathless and unable to walk as far as he used to prior to him being unwell. Associated with his increased breathlessness is his constant feeling of lethargy as a result of his CLL. Over the last year  has felt his physical health deteriorate and his regular admissions to hospital to treat his infections have limited his physical activities. He is now unable to walk more than 100 yards without getting breathless.
Psychological - 
 has found his deteriorating health difficult to come to terms with and admitted to 'feeling very low' at times.  has been prescribed a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor in order to help elevate his mood and help him come to terms with his diagnosis.
Social - On a social level,  has full-time help from his partner, with whom he lives. He has limited contacts with others because he finds it difficult to go out when he is feeling so tired and breathless.
was admitted to the ward at  Hospital on  and has remains an inpatient there (). His bloods are being continuously monitored and his breathlessness has reduced, with his presenting symptoms being stabilised with intravenous antibiotics. As at the , he was awaiting the results of blood cultures, mid-stream urine, sputum culture and blood results, if these were stable and his temperature had lowered, discharge was to be considered.
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) is a form of leukaemia in which there is an excess number of mature but poorly functioning lymphocytes in the circulating blood. The excess number of lymphocytes (in CLL B-cells are affected) is primarily due to the failure of lymphocytes to die at the end of their normal lifespan.
CLL is more often a disease of later life and makes up 40% of all leukaemias in patients over 65 years (1). The overall incidence is about 3/100,000 per year, with a median age of onset of 65 to 70 years (1). In black and white populations the incidence is approximately equal but in Asian populations the condition is rare. The majority of all new cases of CLL (70-80%) are chance findings on a blood test and about 40-60% of patients are symptom-free at the time they are diagnosed. Many cases are also found on the presentation of an enlarged lymph node during a routine check-up. The most common symptoms in those patients who have symptoms at the time of diagnosis include weakness, fatigue, night sweats or proneness to repeated infections. On examination, such patients may have enlarged, non-tender lymph nodes, an enlarged live and/or spleen. Anaemia is present in about 15% of patients as well as the presence of a low platelet count, indicating that the disease has affected the normal production of blood cells in the bone marrow or that there has been auto-immune damage to the red cells or platelets.
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia is not considered a medical emergency unlike acute leukaemia and if it is diagnosed early treatment does not usually start immediately. Diagnosis of CLL is made on a lymphocyte count of at least 5x109/L and immunophenotyping, along with other features of CLL present. New developments in the prognosis of CLL include the use of detecting a rearrangement (mutation) of certain genes (immunoglobulin genes) but the laboratory tests required for diagnosis by this method are not available in most hospital setting. Other tests that can be used in the hospital setting include markers on the surface of CLL cells, associating their levels with the disease outcome but the importance of such tests remains in largely unknown.
Currently there is no curative treatment for CLL but most patients remain well for a long time and have a long survival. The three basic elements of treatment are:
The main drugs used in CLL treatment includes; Alkylating agents (commonly used Chlorambucil), Anthracyclines, Purine analogues (fludarabine and cladribine; preventing the formation of DNA therefore preventing cell division), Monoclonal antibodies (rituximab; an antibody binding specifically to an antigen in lymphocytes, which helps kill the cell with the help of the body's immune system) and Steroids (only in patients with advanced disease or to control auto-immune complications).
Management of CLL depends largely on the signs and symptoms of each individual. Having received the diagnosis of CLL, patients are regularly followed up by their general practitioner and following the Department of Health guidelines, individuals are referred for specialist investigations when:
A high white count with excessive numbers of lymphocytes (particularly in the presence of anaemia or low platelet count)
Presence of enlarged spleen, liver or lymph nodes
Symptomatic disease, i.e. weight loss of over 10% in the last 6 months, fewer over 38oC for 2 or more weeks and extreme fatigue or night sweats.
When CLL patients do require treatment, there will be few occasions when they would require in-patient treatment. Generally, a patient will require in-patient treatment only if they develop a severe infection. If an individual has no significant symptoms at the time of diagnosis, they will attend regular check-ups without going on medication. Currently there is no conclusive evidence that suggests early treatment prolongs survival. The criteria for beginning therapy are:
In summary, CLL is a form of cancer affecting blood producing cells in the bone marrow, with increasing incidence as you get older. The majority of patients have a slowly progressing disease with a survival of 10 years or more. CLL is not considered curable and indeed patients are not treated until they become symptomatic or when blood results indicate that the disease is progressing. The mainstay of treatment is chemotherapy, usually taken orally, and the majority of patients continue to have a good quality of life for many years. Areas of development currently are ways in which to diagnose CLL and how this may correlate to disease progression.
The important issues raised by 's case include the issues of the quality of his life and how best to improve it as his CLL becomes progressively more developed. Over the last year  has had recurrent respiratory tract infections for which he has had 3 admissions to hospital. It is important to consider if his CLL is progressing how best to mange him whilst he is in hospital and what can be done for him in the community.