was referred to  Hospital Medical Admissions Unit (MAU) on  by his General Practitioner (GP) due to a history of weight loss, anaemia and a change in bowel habits. had previously been investigated for this presentation but his care had not continued due to loss of appointments in the outpatient department.
has a long-standing history of weight loss and a change in bowel habits and had been investigated previously with a colonoscopy in . On admission,  was presenting with this history and associated anaemia.  had a chronic history and the differential diagnoses of these presenting complaints need to be considered. These include:
Diverticulitis/diverticular disease
Colorectal carcinoma
Colonic polyps
Angiodysplasia
Infection (e.g. viral, bacterial, protozoal or parasitic)
Malabsorption (e.g. Ulcerative colitis (UC), Crohn's disease, Coeliac's disease, pancreatic disease)
The most likely single cause of 

's presentation is carcinoma until proven otherwise given his age and his symptoms. Another likely differential includes diverticular disease. An  acute exacerbation of ulcerative colitis is also possible because of his history and his prominent diarrhoea, where he passes up to 8 loose stools per day, with the presence of blood in his stools. Accompanied with his diarrhoea,  also presented with weight loss and anorexia, which are typical of both carcinoma and UC. Crohn's disease more often presents with abdominal pain, which  has never suffered from. It is also important not to rule out a carcinoma as a cause for 's symptoms.
On physical examination, findings to look out for include abdominal distension/tenderness, lymphadenopathy, signs of anaemia in the eyes and skin pallor and a rectal mass on PR examination. If  had severe UC, he may present with tachycardia, a fever (&gt;37.5oC) and abdominal pain and tenderness.
On general examination,  was alert, orientated and comfortable at rest. There were no signs of jaundice, clubbing, cyanosis or lymphadenopathy. 
 had pale conjunctiva and pallor, indicative of anaemia. did not look cachexic.
Physical examination confirms initial thoughts for possible causes for 's symptoms. There were no signs of abdominal tenderness, no masses and no lymphadenopathy, indicating there is a reduced possibility of the diagnosis being advanced carcinoma. There was no blood seen of PR examination, indicating that the blood seen in the stools is not rectal blood but blood from higher up in the colon. UC characteristically begins in the rectum and primarily affects the sigmoid colon. You would therefore expect to see some blood on the glove following PR. 's pale conjunctiva and pallor are indicative of anaemia, confirming reduced levels of haemoglobin, most likely as a result of blood loss. The most likely diagnoses still remain:
A 79 year old individual with a history of weight loss, PR bleeding and altered bowel habits has a differential diagnosis of cancer until proven otherwise. Diverticular disease is also commoner than new onset UC within this age group, however, in the case of  he has a history of UC.  has presented with an acute exacerbation of his existing ulcerative colitis. A significant point to mention is that UC greatly increases the risk of developing colorectal carcinoma and the risk is cumulative, i.e. the risk increases further every year after diagnosis and some patients have a prophylactic colectomy 20-30 years after the initial diagnosis because of the high cancer risk. If  doesn't have a carcinoma, his weight loss will primarily be due to dehydration secondary to profuse diarrhoea and reduced appetite. Another confounding factor is the presence of dark (altered) blood in his stool, this is indicative of an upper gastrointestinal problem, i.e. not the colon, therefore the differential diagnosis of an ulcer must be considered.
Physical - 's physical health has been quite good in the last 6 months, prior to feeling progressively more tired and unable to carry out his daily tasks.  finds himself getting more tired following quite simple tasks like shopping and feels that he has physically become much weaker in himself over the last 6 months.
Psychological -  has become very worried about his health. He is anxious about his weight loss and worries about the number of times he has to go to the toilet.  was becoming upset that he was "being a problem" for his wife. Following admission,  was undergoing treatment and his diarrhoea was improving,  became much happier in himself and looked forward to getting home.
Social -  has been restricted socially because of the number of times he has needed to go to the toilet.  said he felt he was always thinking about where he would be able to go if he was out of the house and he didn't feel that he could cope.  has been supported by his wife but was becoming very isolated by the state of his health.
was diagnosed with a mild to moderate attack of UC, which was confirmed on colonoscopy and biopsy on . He was treated with an aminosalicylate to reduce the acute inflammation and maintain remission. His symptoms of bloody diarrhoea, anaemia and lethargy improved and his stools became more formed.  was discharged from the ward 7 days following admission, with a follow-up appointment arranged in the outpatient department.
Ulcerative colitis is characterised by diffuse mucosal inflammation limited to the colon and rectum. Broadly, UC can be divided into distal (colitis confined to rectum (proctitis) or rectum and sigmoid colon) or more extensive disease (colitis up to the spleen or hepatic flexure). The incidence of UC is approximately 10-20 per 100,000 per year (1). The aetiology of UC remains largely unknown and the consensus is that the disease is a response to environmental triggers (infection, drugs or other agents) in genetically susceptible individuals.
The clinical picture of UC primarily involves bloody diarrhoea, with associated symptoms of colicky abdominal pain, urgency or tenesmus. A severe attack of UC is potentially life threatening and the clinical course of UC is marked by relapses and remission. About 50% of patients with UC have a relapse in any year (2) but a minority of patients have a frequently relapsing, chronic, continuous disease. About 30% of patients ultimately undergo a colectomy.
The diagnosis of UC is confirmed by clinical evaluation and a combination of biochemical, endoscopic, radiological and histological based investigations. Macroscopic findings on sigmoidoscopy or colonoscopy support the diagnosis of UC.
The medical management of UC depends on the disease activity and the extent of its effect. Patients with a severe disease require hospitalisation and those with mild-moderate disease can generally be managed as outpatients. It is recommended that for active left-sided or extensive UC, treatment should be with oral aminosalicylates or corticosteroids to give prompt relief of symptoms (1). Active distal colitis should be treated with topical Mesalazine or topical steroid combined with oral Mesalazine or corticosteroids to give prompt relief of symptoms. Severe UC should be managed jointly by a gastroenterologist in conjunction with colorectal surgeon (1). Patients should be kept in informed of treatment and prognosis, including the possibility of needing a colectomy. Patients with UC should normally receive maintenance therapy with aminosalicylates, azathioprine or mercaptopurine to reduce the risk of relapse (1).
Long-term treatment with steroids is not desirable and patients who have a poor response to steroids can be divided into steroid-refractory and steroid-dependent. Steroid refractory disease is active disease in spite of an adequate dose and duration of prednisolone (&gt;20mg.day for &gt;2weeks). Steroid dependence is a relapse when the steroid dose is reduced below 20mg/day or within 6 weeks of stopping the steroids. Such patients should be considered for treatment with immunosuppression if surgery is not an immediate consideration. Such immunomodulators include azathioprine (1.5mg-2.5mg/kg/day) or mercaptopurine (0.75-1.25mg/kg/day), methotrexate (25mg weekly) or infliximab (5mg/kg).
As previously mentioned in this case, the differential diagnosis of a colorectal carcinoma was an important consideration. Some of the risk factors for this cancer include:
Age - Colorectal cancer can occur in younger people, but over 9 out of 10 people who get it are over the age of 50 years.
A previous polyp or colorectal cancer - Not all types of polyps increase the risk of bowel cancer, but a type called adenomatous polyp does.
Personal history of chronic bowel inflammation - Ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease will increase the risk of developing colorectal cancer.
Diet - A diet that is high in red meat and fat and low in vegetables, folate and fibre may increase the risk of colorectal cancer.
Exercise - Moderate exercise may help prevent colorectal cancer developing.
Obesity - Being overweight or obese may increase the risk of colorectal cancer developing.
Smoking and alcohol - Although not as strong a risk factor as for other cancers, smoking may also increase the risk of colorectal cancer, particularly in heavy drinkers. Alcohol consumption may increase risk, especially in those with low levels of folate in their diet.
Family history - Less than 1 in 10 cases of colorectal cancer are due to an inherited gene defect. However, there are certain families who have an increased risk of developing colorectal cancer due to a variety of conditions including familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer (HNPCC).
Personal history of colorectal cancer - Having had colorectal cancer before increases the risk of a new cancer developing.
The relevant risk factors for  were his age, history of inflammatory bowel disease, diet, exercise, history of smoking in the past and alcohol consumption.
Reducing the incidence of cancer is a long-term Government initiative, included in this is the goal to reduce cancer mortality and this is hoped to be achieved with the use of screening programmes. Where screening is possible, it is an important method of detecting abnormalities at an early stage, allowing treatment when the cancer is most likely to be curable, or in some cases, even before it develops. The National Bowel Cancer Screening Programme is due to start in April 2006.
Important issues raised by this case include the issues of continuing patient care once they have left the hospital and the importance of organising follow-up appointments and investigations.  was in the unfortunate position that he was lost in the out-patient system because he was unable to attend some of the appointments that he had once he underwent investigations in . As a result he did not receive any follow-up until he presented with an acute attack of his colitis and required admission to control the episode.