was admitted to  Hospital,  on  with recurrent episodes of dizziness and falls.
Based on the acute symptoms  presented with, the differential diagnoses of dizziness and recurrent falls are:
Drug side-effects: anti-hypertensive medication can cause a dizziness as a result of postural hypotension whereby the difference between lying and standing systolic blood pressure is >30mmHg.
Benign positional vertigo: displacement of the otoconia (otoliths) from the maculae (the receptor for sensing acceleration in the semi-circular canals). Otoconia then settle on the lowest part of the labyrinth.
Cardiovascular causes: arrhythmias, transient vertebro-basilar ischaemia, hypotension from bleeding, silent MIs and a low cardiac output.
Dehydration: a possibility in 's as he has difficulty swallowing following his previous strokes.
Anaemia
Elderly patients per se are more prone to falls as they become more unsteady on their feet and their body sway increases due to an impaired compensatory mechanism.
Black-outs: can cause falls, which can be preceded by dizziness. There was no evidence or history of blackouts in 's case.
On physical examination, it is important to look for a postural drop in blood pressure readings. A full cardiovascular examination should be carried out to determine any arrhythmias such as Atrial Fibrillation for which  is being treated for. Loss of skin turgor and dry mucous membranes will help to determine whether  is dehydrated.
On general examination  was alert and orientated. There were no signs of jaundice, clubbing, cyanosis, lymphadenopathy. Capillary refill <2 seconds. The conjunctiva looked pale and skin turgor was reduced. complained of itchy eyes. looked cachexic.
History and examination confirm some the initial possible diagnosis of 's presentation. A review of his medication is required, although the change in systolic BP between lying and standing was not significant. Arrhythmias seem an unlikely cause as nothing was noted on examination but an ECG will rule out any cardiac abnormalities. There was nothing else to note of significance on 's physical examination.
The most likely diagnoses at this stage are iatrogenic causes, dehydration and benign positional vertigo.
Physical - Physically,  is at risk of injuring himself following his falls. He has on occasions hit his head as he has fallen and as he continues to fall he will find himself becoming less confident about walking and become less mobile. It is important to minimise his risks of falls to help  retain his independence for as long as possible.
Psychological - 
 remained an upbeat man and wanted to go home.
Social - 
 had social support from his wife and family.  was a mobile man and required some help in light of his visual disability. He was partly independent in his home.
had a confirmed diagnosis of acute or chronic renal failure secondary to dehydration and was given fluids whilst in hospital.  remained an inpatient for 1 week.
Instability, the principal feature of which is falls, is a common feature of elderly people. 20% of 65 to 69 year olds have had a fall in the past 12 months, 40% of people over the age of 80 (1). Falls have important implications both on the personal level and on the level of the cost to the NHS; a large burden of care is placed by people falling and needing inpatient treatment, not to mention the considerable morbidity and mortality suffered by this group. Roughly 50% of falls in the elderly follow a trip or an accident, with a mere 5% caused by dizziness. 5% are accompanied by loss of consciousness, 10% are a result of the legs giving way for no known reason. The remaining 30% are unexplained. (1)
The reasons for increasing rates of falls and morbidity associated with falls in the elderly are broadly based on:
poorer motor responses, with some abnormal gaits, such as that of Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease being more common in the aged
poorer protective mechanisms - where the elderly fail to put out their arms to save themselves, leading to reduced upper limb morbidity but increased damage to other structures
loss of fitness, as a result of disuse, often as a result of society's expectations
Cardiovascular causes of falls include:
Postural hypotension: - secondary to intercurrent illness aggravated by chronic venous insufficiency - age associated autonomic neuropathy - drugs (diuretics, nitrates, tricyclic antidepressants, sedatives hypnotics and neuroleptics)
Arrhythmias: - Age associated idiopathic fibrosis of conducting tissue may cause sino-atrial exit block, sick sinus syndrome, paroxysmal AF or heart block.
An important issue raised in this case involve 's residual problems swallowing following his previous strokes, which has in part led to his admission for dehydration. This has highlighted the importance of a swallowing assessment and planning adequate fluid and dietary requirements post-stroke.