was in the  hospital for an elective Anterior Resection of the rectum with a covering Ileostomy.  was referred to Mr  at the  General Hospital from her General Practitioner (GP) after presenting with what she believed to be haemorrhoids and lumps of blood on the sides of her stool.
Based on the symptoms experienced by , at time of presentation to her GP, her symptoms may have been consistent with the following causes of fresh rectal bleeding - diverticulitis, colorectal cancer, colonic polyps, piles, trauma, fissure-in-ano, inflammatory bowel disease, angiodysplasia and rectal carcinoma. As stated previously, following investigations  was found to have a mid-rectal adenocarcinoma. Had  undergone radiotherapy, her symptoms may indicate possible radiation proctitis.
In view of 's age, her presentation with persistent rectal bleeding without anal symptoms and with no obvious external evidence of benign anal disease is a situation that requires an urgent referral.
In light of the bleeding  was experiencing over a number of months, it is possible that  was anaemic on presentation (microcytic anaemia). On physical examination anaemia may present pale palmar creases and pale conjunctiva. The site of the tumour can be linked to the findings on per rectum (PR) examination; if the carcinoma is present on the left-hand side, bleeding on PR or and/or the location of a mass is typical. It is also common for the passage of mucus to be seen on PR in rectal carcinoma. Physical examination may also reveal a tender abdomen.
On general examination,  was alert and orientated and comfortable at rest.  was a thin lady. There were no signs of jaundice, anaemia, clubbing, cyanosis, oedema or lymphadenopathy. There were no xanthelasma present in the eyes.
Respiratory System - Chest was clear, with no wheeze or crepitations and vesicular breathing was present.
Abdomen - No distension, no tenderness
No palpable masses/no organomegaly
Bowel sounds were normal and present
A PR examination was not performed on this patient due to unavailable supervision.
CNS - Grossly intact
At the time of interview  had been admitted for elective surgery in light of her diagnosis of mid rectal carcinoma. Colorectal carcinoma causes rectal bleeding and stenosis, causing the symptoms of increasing abdominal obstruction seen as an alteration in bowel habit and a colicky abdominal pain. Rectal bleeding was the only presenting symptom in  but as mentioned, this is treated urgently with regards to her age.
Clinical examination can often be unhelpful in such cancers, as it was in this case; there was no abdominal mass palpable transabdominally and unfortunately a PR could not be performed. It is important to note that there was no hepatomegaly on examination, which is an indication of whether there are liver metastases present. To confirm this ultrasound of the liver could be performed.
Physical - 's only physical problem was bleeding on opening her bowels and following her surgery this will be resolved.  was not in any pain as a result of her rectal carcinoma and did not feel she had physical problems.
Psychological -  found it difficult to accept that she required surgery. Initially  was not "keen on surgery" but having been given the appropriate information and having spoken to the Stoma Nurse, she began to feel able to cope with the stoma bag.  was happier knowing the details of her surgery and the possibility of having her ileostomy reversed pleased her.
Social -  had support at home from her husband and son and was confident that she would be able to cope with the stoma bag once she was discharged from hospital. The risk factors of smoking and alcohol intake was not an issue for .
Following the surgery,  remained on the surgical ward for 2 weeks. She was discharged by Mr  and the Stoma Nurse once the team were happy with the working of the ileostomy and 's ability to change the stoma bags.
In the UK approximately 35,000 people are diagnosed with bowel cancer every year (1). In England and Wales, this number is increasing by 1% every year for men (it is staying the same for women) (1). Approximately 16,000 people will die of the disease every year, making it the second most common cause of cancer death in the UK (lung cancer being the most common of all) (1). Survival rates in the UK have improved over the past 25 years; it is now estimated that half of the people diagnosed with bowel cancer will survive for 5 years or more.
Some of the risk factors for this cancer have been mentioned previously and include:
Age - Colorectal cancer can occur in younger people, but over 9 out of 10 people who get it are over the age of 50 years.
A previous polyp or colorectal cancer - Not all types of polyps increase the risk of bowel cancer, but a type called adenomatous polyp does.
Personal history of chronic bowel inflammation - Ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease will slightly increase the risk of developing colorectal cancer.
Diet - A diet that is high in red meat and fat and low in vegetables, folate and fibre may increase the risk of colorectal cancer.
Exercise - Moderate exercise may help prevent colorectal cancer developing.
Obesity - Being overweight or obese may increase the risk of colorectal cancer developing.
Smoking and alcohol - Although not as strong a risk factor as for other cancers, smoking may also increase the risk of colorectal cancer, particularly in heavy drinkers. Alcohol consumption may increase risk, especially in those with low levels of folate in their diet.
Family history - Less than 1 in 10 cases of colorectal cancer are due to an inherited gene defect. However, there are certain families who have an increased risk of developing colorectal cancer due to a variety of conditions including familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) and hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer (HNPCC).
Personal history of colorectal cancer - Having had colorectal cancer before increases the risk of a new cancer developing.
The relevant risk factors for  were her age and possibly her diet.
Reducing the incidence of cancer is a long-term Government initiative to reduce cancer mortality and this is hoped to be achieved with the use or screening programmes. Where screening is possible, it is an important method of detecting abnormalities at an early stage, allowing treatment when the cancer is most likely to be curable, or in some cases, even before it develops. The National Bowel Cancer Screening Programme is due to start in April 2006
Bowel cancer is a major public health problem. It is the second most common cause of cancer deaths in the United Kingdom. Research has shown that screening for bowel cancer can help reduce death rates by finding and treating bowel cancer early. It is predicted that deaths from bowel cancer could drop by 15% as a result of screening. Nationally, screening for bowel cancer could save approximately 1,200(2) lives each year. Patients whose cancer is discovered early have more treatment options and a better long term outlook. The treatment of rectal cancer is usually by surgery. Radiotherapy and cytotoxic chemotherapy are used palliatively where the tumour is inoperable.
Colorectal carcinomas are relatively unresponsive to chemotherapy but palliative chemotherapy in patients with locally advanced or metastatic disease has been shown to reduce death and progression at 12 months (1). The findings translate into a 16% absolute difference in survival and a 25% increase in progression free survival (increases in 3.7 months in median survival and 6 months in median progression free survival) in patients treated with palliative chemotherapy e.g. 5-fluorouracil alone or in combination with other chemotherapeutic agents.
The choice of operation depends on the height of the lesion above the anal verge, it's configuration, gross extent and degree of differentiation, and the patient's general condition. A colostomy may be required and this should be discussed with the patient.
Four principal operations are used:
local resection: if the patient is too old or frail to withstand a major operation
anterior resection of rectum: for growths more than 10 cm from the anal verge but below the recto-sigmoid junction.
abdomino-perineal resection of rectum: for growths less than 10 cm from the anal verge
Hartmann's procedure: if the tumour is unresectable.
An anterior resection of the rectum is used to treat rectal carcinoma where it is more than 10 cm from the anal verge but below the recto-sigmoid junction. It is an extensive operation since the rectum must be mobilised within the pelvic musculature. The tumour is resected with a satisfactory distal margin - typically 5 centimetres - and the anastomosis performed between the rectal stump and the left side of the colon. A protective transverse loop colostomy may be also be carried out.
Important issues raised in this case include the Colorectal Screening Programme, the issue of stigma with regards to stomas and the importance of taking thorough histories with regard to symptoms such as rectal bleeding, even when the presenting patient may not feel unwell.
The Colorectal Screening Programme is currently only set up for those patients who are at a particularly high risk of colorectal carcinoma (such as familial polyposis). With the incidence of colorectal carcinoma increasing it is important to look at the public health issue of introducing a screening programme for more individuals. The drawback of such a screening programme however is the issue of engaging individuals in sending stool samples to be investigated.
The stigma of having such major surgery and resulting in a stoma bag may also need to be addressed. Initially  was very apprehensive about having an operation and a stoma bag and perhaps part of this may be resolved by educating individuals about the diseases involved and stomas themselves.
The importance of diagnosing a rectal carcinoma in its early stages has been highlighted to me in this case. The importance of a correct cancer diagnosis, staging and grading is important in order to be able to make the most appropriate treatment choice. The importance of giving the patient time to recover from major surgery and adjust to a new lifestyle following that surgery has been illustrated.