Mrs Mrs
Mrs When her skin complaints first started, she was treated with a course of steroids and anti-histamines, which initially worked to treat her problems. Following that, the erythematous areas become itchier and eventually began to blister.
Based on the history, there are a number of possible causes for Mrs These causes include:
Bullous Pemphigoid. Chronic and not uncommon blistering eruption of the elderly. Tense large blisters arise on red or normal-looking skin, often of the limbs, trunk and flexures. A urticarial eruption may precede the onset of blistering.
Dermatitis Herpetiformis (DH). The uncommon eruption of symmetrical, itchy blisters on the extensor surfaces. Jejunal villous atrophy is an associated finding in most cases. DH usually presents in the third to fourth decade and is twice as common in males as it is in females. The classical onset is with groups of small, intensely itchy vesicles on the elbows, knees, buttocks and scalp. The blisters are often broken by scratching to leave excoriations.
Linear IgA Disease. A rare heterozygous condition of blisters and urticarial lesions on the back or extensor surfaces. The disorder responds to dapsone (an antileprotic drug effective in DH) and may resemble DH or Pemphigoid.
Pemphigus. Tends to affect the middle-aged or younger people so this differential diagnosis is least likely in Mrs Cutaneous blistering is seen with flaccid superficial blisters on the scalp, face, back, chest and flexures. The lesions may consist of crusted erosions.
On physical examination it is important to look over the whole of the body for the full representation of the skin problems. You should look for current blisters and feel how tense they are. You should feel the erythematous areas to distinguish their surfaces and look if the skin is excoriated, flaky/scaly or inflamed. Looking for signs of infection (pus/weeping areas) is also important.
On general examination, Mrs There were no signs of jaundice, clubbing, cyanosis, lymphadenopathy or anaemia.
Mrs On examination at initial presentation, the blisters were indicative of subepidermal blisters because of their tense nature. The year long history with dry erythematous patches with itching and then blistering later in its course are a typical presentation of bullous pemphigoid. The urticarial eruption is also typical of bullous pemphigoid. Mrs
At this stage, the most likely cause of Mrs
 She felt quite fit and healthy despite the blisters on her skin and the itching she was experiencing. Mrs
 She was anxious about the steroids she had to take and did not want to put any weight or have bad side effects from them. Following the immunofluorescence studies Mrs
 She was otherwise a relatively healthy lady. Mrs
Mrs Mrs Mrs Mrs Mrs On the There have been no complications with her bullous pemphigoid treatment; she was discharged home 4 days later.
Bullous Pemphigoid (BP) is a chronic, acquired autoimmune subepidermal bullous disease in which autoantibodies are directed against components of the basement membrane zone of the skin, causing blistering of the skin. BP is characterised by the presence of IgG autoantibodies specific to hemidesmosomal BP antigens. BP is the most common blistering disease in the West, with an estimated incidence of 6-7 cases per million population per year (1). BP occurs equally in both sexes and it is usually a disease of the elderly (>70 years).
BP is a non-scarring blistering disease, with a typical presentation in the flexure regions, however the disease can be generalised. Mucous membranes are involved in about 50% of patients (2). Tense blisters occur on either erythematous or normal appearing skin and the blister formation may be preceded by an urticarial or eczematous rash. The degree of itch in each individual varies from none to intense and it can precede the presentation of blisters by weeks, months and occasionally years.
Diagnosis of BP is made clinically, histologically and immunohistochemically (using either direct and/or indirect immunofluorescence). Biopsies of a fresh blister show a subepidermal cleft with a mixed dermal inflammatory infiltrate containing numerous Eosinophils. IgG and/or C3 deposits are found at the basement membrane zone. The class of immunoglobulin bound to the basement membrane zone distinguishes from Linear IgA disease.
The treatment aim in BP is to suppress the clinical signs sufficiently to make the disease tolerable to an individual patient, i.e. the reduction of blister formation, urticarial lesions and pruritus. The disease is self-limiting and usually remits within 5 years, the mortality rates today vary between 6% and 41% (3). The treatment primarily aims to reduce the inflammatory process, i.e. with the use of corticosteroids and antibiotics. Immunosuppressive agents aim to suppress the production of the pathogenic antibodies.
BP is a long-term disease and ideally all patients should be followed until they are in complete remission and off all treatment. They should be regularly reviewed to ensure that they are not being continued on higher doses of topical or systemic treatment than are necessary to provide sufficient control of their disease.
There is no established optimum treatment for BP and therefore there is no gold standard against which to audit clinical practice. In an age when our population are living longer, it is inevitable that BP will become increasingly more frequent. There is a clear need to determine how to assess patients clinically and how to ascertain optimum regimes for the treatment of mild, moderate and severe BP.
The important issue of continuing investigations into a long-standing complaint has been raised by this case. It is important that health care delivery continues until the correct management plan can be implemented and the individual's quality of life is improved or indeed returns back to the level it was prior to illness.