Mr  was referred to  Hospital,  on the  by his general practitioner (GP). The referral was made on the basis of worsening pain In Mr 's right-side chest wall.
Based on the symptoms Mr  presented with, the differential diagnoses of right-sided chest pain, worsening over 4-5 weeks and on exertion are:
Pleural Effusion: fluid in the pleural space, which can be divided into low protein content (transudate) and high protein content (exudates). They are often asymptomatic but patients can experience dyspnoea and a pleuritic chest pain. Transudates are due to an increase in venous pressure (such as from cardiac failure, constrictive pericarditis or fluid overload). Exudates are most likely due to an increase in the leakiness of pleural capillaries secondary to malignancy, infection or inflammation.
Neoplasm: with clinical symptoms of a persistent cough, haemoptysis, dyspnoea, chest pain, anorexia and weight loss. Recurrent slowly resolving pneumonias are also a common feature.
Pneumonia: consider atypical pneumonias, for example mycoplasma.
Tuberculosis
Trauma-related; rib fracture:
Pulmonary Embolism: a clinical picture of acute breathlessness, pleuritic chest pain, haemoptysis, dizziness and syncope. PEs usually arise from a venous thrombosis in the pelvis or legs. Clots break off and pass through the venous system and the right side of the heart before lodging in the pulmonary circulation.
On physical examination, a full respiratory examination will be carried out; assessment of respiratory rate, oxygen saturations, breath sounds (bronchial breathing is often heard in pleural effusions). Listening to air entry and the presence of added sounds; crackles indicating infection or wheezes suggestive of airways disease. It is also important to look for signs of trauma and palpate for tenderness over the chest wall, which would be present if there was a rib fracture. An overall examination of Mr  will help build a clinical picture that may indicate a malignancy; palpating for lymphadenopathy should be carried out.
On general examination, Mr  was alert and orientated. There were no signs of clubbing, cyanosis, jaundice or lymphadenopathy. Mr  had pale conjunctiva. Capillary refill &lt;2 seconds. Reduced skin turgor and dry mucus membranes.
Following examination, the most likely diagnosis for Mr 's presentation is a right-sided pleural effusion, possibly secondary to a neoplasm in light of the presence of hepatomegaly. The effusion could also be complicated by a chest infection suggested by the crackles heard on examination. The pleural effusion will need to be aspirated and sent for histology to determine whether it is an exudate or a transudate fluid. Exudative effusion (protein &gt;30g/dL) can be caused by infection or malignancy. Malignant cells can be seen on cytology. It is important to rule out a malignancy as a cause for the effusion and Mr  requires a chest X-ray followed by a CT if a lesion is found.
Physical - Mr  is physically able and independent. Since his chest pain started he has been finding it more difficult to carry out his usual tasks of daily living. His difficulty breathing also makes mobilising more difficult.
Psychological - Mr  had become worried about his chest pain as it had been continuing for so long. He went to his GP because he was worried he was having a heart attack.
Social - Mr  had support from his wife and family and was an independent man.
Mr  remained an inpatient for over 1 week whilst the necessary investigations were carried out. Mr  had a confirmed diagnosis of a right-sided pleural effusion, most likely to be a reactive pleural effusion to a right lower lobe pneumonia. No malignant changes were identified.
An important issue raised in this case includes the issue of breaking bad news with regards to a terminal diagnosis. There was no terminal diagnosis in this case but it was necessary to discuss the possibility that Mr  had a lung cancer.