Mrs  was admitted to the Medical Assessment Unit (MAU) at  Hospital,  following a collapse at her nursing home on .
Based on the acute symptoms Mrs  presented with, the differential diagnoses of collapse, verbally unresponsive in a COPD patient are:
Collapse secondary to CO2 retention: given Mrs 's history of COPD, her dyspnoea, drowsiness, tachycardia and confusion fit with this diagnosis.
Collapse secondary to Stroke/TIA: the risk factors of her age and previous coronary events coupled with her acute presentation and weakness could be indicative of a stroke.
Lower respiratory tract infection
Left Ventricular Failure/Congestive Cardiac Failure
On physical examination, it is important to assess the level of Mrs 's responsiveness from the GCS assessment. Her vital signs should be assessed, particularly her oxygen saturations and blood gases. An examination should assess her cardiovascular and respiratory status, listening for crackles and air entry.
On general examination, Mrs 
was drowsy and non-rousable. She did not respond verbally but would respond to painful stimuli with moans. She would open her eyes after persistent commands. Mrs  had cold peripheries and her capillary refill was 3 seconds. There were no signs of jaundice, clubbing or lymphadenopathy. Mrs  was very pale and was cyanosed.
GCS - Motor response 5/6 (localising response to pain), Verbal response 2/5 (incomprehensible speech), Eye opening 3/4 (eye opening in response to speech) = 10/15
History and examination confirm the initial possible causes of Mrs 's presentation. A collapse secondary to an infective exacerbation of COPD leading to Type II respiratory failure and CO2 retention is the most likely diagnosis. Her O 2 saturations indicate she has poor respiratory function and an ABG will help determine her respiratory state. Tachycardia, confusion, drowsiness and central cyanosis all support this diagnosis. The presence of crackles bilaterally would indicate a possible respiratory tract infection which may have precipitated Mrs 's collapse.
Physical - Mrs  found it difficult to mobilise herself prior to admission. She has had repeated falls, one of which she was admitted for. She is becoming progressively more unsteady on her feet. This is putting her at increase risk of further falls and consequently reducing her physical state further. As a result of her COPD, Mrs  is unable to walk without O 2; this further limits her physical ability. Her immobility increases the risk of retaining respiratory secretions predisposing Mrs  to chest infections.
Psychological - On admission, Mrs  was verbally unresponsive but following admission and some degree of recovery she became upset regarding about her poor mobility and loss of independence. Mrs  exhibited a fear about her death.
Social - Mrs 's social situation is stable and well supported. She gets full-time care from her nursing home and requires help dressing, washing and some support mobilising.
Mrs  was admitted to the ward and began responding verbally but remained unable to mobilise. Sadly, Mrs  passed away 2 days after her admission to the ward.
Respiratory failure occurs when there is an inadequate gas exchange, which results in hypoxia (pO 2 &lt;8kPa). Respiratory failure is subdivided into two types according to the pCO 2.
Type I Respiratory Failure is defined as hypoxia (pO 2 &lt;8kPa) with a normal or low pCO 2. It is primarily caused by a ventilation/perfusion mismatch.
Type II Respiratory Failure is defined as hypoxia with hypercapnia (pCO 2 &gt; 6.5kPa). It is caused by alveolar hypoventilation with or without ventilation/perfusion mismatch. (1)
The management of respiratory failure includes the administration of supplemental oxygen, the control of secretions, the treatment of any underlying pulmonary infection, the control of any bronchospasm and measures to limit pulmonary oedema.
The management principles are:
treat the underlying disease
physiotherapy
oxygen therapy - try to maintain pO 2 &gt; 8 kPa
bronchodilators and steroids if there is airways obstruction
in some circumstances, respiratory stimulants such as i.v. doxapram 1-4 mg / min, may be indicated if the pCO 2 begins to rise
if arterial O 2 continues to deteriorate or fails to improve then some form of respiratory support should be considered
long-term management should be aimed at the underlying cause of the condition e.g. COPD
An important issue raised in this case was the issue of resuscitation in the event of a cardiac arrest. Mrs  had been deteriorating steadily over the past few months and her respiratory function is poor. On previous occasions her family had been notified that it was difficult to predict whether she would recover. On her admission this time, Mrs  was in a similar position and at risk of a cardiac arrest and it was a sensitive issue that needed to be discussed with the family. This case highlighted the issues of health care delivery to patients who may not benefit from further medical intervention and how to approach this issue with the family. Mrs  was fully dependent on care, had restricted mobility and struggling with a progressive terminal illness. The decision was taken not to resuscitate in the event of a cardiac arrest on the basis of a reduced quality of life.