Mr  was admitted to the  General Hospital on 
 following a collapse at home. Mr  was brought into hospital by the paramedics.
Based on the acute symptoms Mr  presented with, the differential diagnoses of collapse with one-sided weakness are:
Stroke: Rapid onset of focal neurological signs from an ischaemic infarction or a bleed in part of the brain whereby symptoms last longer than 24 hours.
Transient Ischaemic Attack (TIA): The sudden onset of focal neurological signs due to temporary occlusions of the cerebral circulation whereby symptoms fully resolve within 24 hours.
Physical examination will look for signs of neurological deficits, including upper motor neuron signs of hypertonia, hyperreflexia, babinski reflex, rigidity and lower motor neuron signs of hypotonia, hyporeflexia, loss of power in muscles and muscle fasciculations. Sensation and signs of hemiparesis will also be assessed in the upper and lower limbs.
A cranial nerve examination will be performed assessing each cranial nerve I-XII, with particular attention to any possible visual field defects and assessment of the gag reflex (CNXII) for assessment of a brainstem stroke.
On general examination, Mr  was confused but alert. There were no signs of clubbing, cyanosis, lymphadenopathy, jaundice or anaemia. Capillary refill was <2 seconds.
History and examination confirm the initial possible causes of Mr 's presentation. Mr 's neurological signs remained for longer than 24 hours without resolving and therefore favour a diagnosis of stroke over that of a TIA. Neurological assessment indicated a left-sided abnormality. The signs on examination supporting the diagnosis of stroke are the unilateral left-sided facial palsy and the slight weakness of the left upper and lower limbs.
By the , Mr 's left-sided weakness had improved and he was mobilising with 2 sticks. He remained confused but the improvement of his weakness over 6 days indicates that he had a mild stroke. The most likely cause of this stroke is an ischaemic event.
Physical - Physically Mr  found it very difficult to mobilise himself when he was first admitted. His left-sided weakness limited his ability to stand, which he cannot do unaided since his collapse. Mr 's left upper limb had also been affected and he is unable to raise his left hand fully preventing him from carrying out day to day tasks. During his stay in hospital Mr 's weakness improved and his regained some of the function in his left side. Mr  right-hand side remained intact. With physiotherapy it is hoped that his left-sided weakness will improve further.
Psychological - Mr  became progressively more disheartened by his stay in hospital and was struggling to deal with the loss of function in his arms and legs. Mr  was a previously independent man and was upset that he was going to have to rely on his wife more at home. Mr  and his wife had previously refused a package of care at home feeling that he was not in need of it.
Social - Mr  was previously independent at home and managed his tasks of daily living by himself and with the help of his wife. Following his collapse, Mr 's social circumstances may benefit from a care package drawn up for himself and his wife in order to help at home. Mr  is medically stable and requires help in improving his left-sided weakness.
Mr  remained in hospital for over 2 weeks whilst he became medically stable and his package of care was organised for his discharge. Mr 's left-sided weakness gradually improved during his stay in hospital and he was transferred off the Acute Stroke Unit. Mr  received input from the physiotherapists, occupational therapist and had a social referral to organise his care package.
Stroke represents the third most common cause of death in the UK and developed countries, accounting for 12% of all UK deaths (1). The incidence increases exponentially with age, rising from about 3 per 10,000 in the third and fourth decades to about 300 per 10,000 in the eighth and ninth. Total prevalence is estimated at 5-8 per 1,000 over the age of 25 years. About 16% of all women and about 8% of all men are likely to die of a stroke (2). The cumulative risk of recurrence of a stroke is high; between a third and half of survivors are likely to experience a second stroke within 5 years (2). Stroke is the third biggest cause of death in the UK and the largest single cause of severe disability. Each year more than 110,000 people in England will suffer from a stroke which costs the NHS over 2.8 billion. The Department of Health recognised the importance of developing better stroke services by including specific milestones, targets and actions in the National Service Framework (NSF) for Older People launched in March 2001. Following on from this, the Government has announced an 18 month work programme to produce a National Strategy to modernise service provision and deliver the newest treatments for stroke. By 2010 the Government aims to reduce the death rate from Stroke, CHD and related diseases in people under 75 by at least 40%.
The clinical features of a patient presenting with a suspected stroke can help indicate the area of the brain that has been affected. In strokes involving an infarction, focal brain damage may reflect the distribution of the affected artery, but sometimes collateral supplies make the diagnosis of the lesion site, based on the clinical features, more difficult. Using the Bamford classification of strokes, infarctions can be divided into four classes: total anterior circulatory (TACI), partial anterior circulatory (PACI), lacunar (LACI) and posterior circulatory (POCI) infarcts (3).
Important issues raised in this case include the level of care required when Mr  is discharged and how to assess his confusion. It is important to take into account how his confusion may lead to his physical progress being slow because he may be unable to comprehend what he needs to do. His confusion may settle when he is at home again and in his own surroundings. Health care delivery should include advice and help to his wife and family about MR 's care and how they can be involved. Including them in making his care plans helps them to understand the level of care Mr  may need and helps to take the pressure off the family to care solely for him.
Acute presentation of unilateral limb weakness.
Short-term management of stroke.
Multidisciplinary approach to rehabilitation following stroke.