Ms  was referred to  Hospital Medical Admissions Unit (MAU) by her General Practitioner (GP) on . The referral was made on the basis of obvious jaundice in the sclera and skin and a history of hallucinations for several nights.
Based on the acute symptoms Ms  presented with, the differential diagnoses of acute jaundice, with associated hallucinations and a history of excess alcohol use are:
Alcohol Withdrawal: nausea and vomiting may be attributed to alcohol withdrawal per se within 6-12 hours of cessation of drinking. Late features of alcohol withdrawal usually occur within 2-3 days and include visual hallucinations. Delirium tremens can occur from alcohol withdrawal and is generally more common in heavy alcoholics. Delirium Tremens is a state of confusion arising following withdrawal or abstinence from alcohol and is accompanied by trembling and vivid hallucinations which may result in seizures and sometimes death.
Alcoholic Liver Disease: hepatocellular damage may manifest as jaundice.
Drug Reactions - with a history of previous overdose, it may be possible that another overdose may have been taken, which can present as nausea and vomiting.
On physical examination will look for signs of alcohol withdrawal; tachycardia, reduced blood pressure, and tremors. I will also look for an irregular pulse (drug overdose) and respiratory depression (opiate toxicity).
Examining for signs of chronic liver disease will also be performed (spider naevi, palmar erythema, dupuytren's contracture, caput medusae, hepatosplenomegaly and ascites), signs of anaemia, jaundice and generalised lymphadenopathy. Endocrine signs of chronic liver disease to be looked for on examination include hair loss (and in a male gynaecomastia and testicular atrophy). Neurological signs of chronic liver disease (hepatic encephalopathy due to toxic metabolites accumulating in the blood stream and crossing the blood-brain-barrier) include flapping hands, confusion, drowsiness, constructional apraxia and fetor hepaticus.
It is also important to rule out the possibility of Wernicke's encephalopathy, which is due to a thiamine deficiency, often seen in alcoholics. It presents with a triad of nystagmus, ophthalmoplegia and ataxia. Ptosis, abnormal papillary reactions and altered consciousness may also occur. Wernicke's may also present with headache, anorexia, vomiting and confusion. Looking for evidence of Korsakoff's syndrome is also important. Korsakoff's is the reduced ability to acquire new memories, e.g. after Wernicke's encephalopathy, due to the thiamine deficiency.
On general examination, Ms  was alert and orientated. Ms  had nausea. Jaundice was present in the sclera and skin. Capillary refill &lt;2secounds. There were no signs of clubbing, cyanosis or lymphadenopathy. Ms 
did not exhibit flapping hands. There was  no fetor hepaticus. The patient was not hallucinating at the time of examination.
History and examination confirm the initial possible causes of Ms 's presentation. The signs of chronic liver disease were hepatomegaly and jaundice, which suggest a diagnosis of alcoholic hepatitis. The hallucinations 5 days after the cessation of drinking suggest acute alcoholic withdrawal, possibly with delirium tremens. The signs on physical examination of alcohol withdrawal include a pulse rate of 100 and a history of hallucinations. The presence of jaundice with no other liver or bowel symptoms/presentations indicates that the jaundice is hepatic.
The most likely diagnosis is alcoholic hepatitis and acute alcohol withdrawal.
Physical - Physically Ms  felt tired and ached all over her body since she stopped drinking 5 days prior to admission. Ms  had no specific physical problems but felt weak and unable to do things. Her history of hallucinations and walking in the middle of the night puts her at risk of physically harming herself.
Psychological - Ms  described herself as "depressed and fed-up". She did not feel very positive about herself or her life and she worried about her hallucinations. Ms  also worried that she would not be able to stop drinking.
Social - Ms 's social habits are the precipitating factor in her illness and she relies heavily on drinking alcohol to get her through her week. Ms  feels vulnerable and alone in her life.
Ms  had a confirmed diagnosis of alcoholic hepatitis and cirrhosis secondary to alcohol abuse. Presenting with hallucinations is indicative of delirium tremens and is an indication of severe alcohol abuse. Ms  was discharged on  having received a reducing dose of chlordiazepoxide. Ms  was stable and her hallucinations had stopped.
Approximately 1% of the population are psychologically or physically dependent upon alcohol: 20-30% of these develop alcoholic liver disease. Approximately 25% of liver cirrhosis is due to alcohol (1). Current recommendations for safe alcohol consumption: 21 units for males and 14 units for females per week. 1 unit of alcohol (approximately 1g) represents a measure of spirit, a glass of wine or half a pint of beer. An intake of 20 units or more per day is associated with a high risk of hepatocellular damage. Alcohol intake is directly related to death from chronic liver disease.
Alcohol produces a wide variety of liver disease, from fatty change to hepatitis and cirrhosis. Fatty change involves the production of fat in the liver from the metabolism of alcohol and the cells become swollen with fat. This fat disappears on stopping alcohol. Alcoholic hepatitis sees the infiltration by polymorphonuclear leucocytes and hepatocyte necrosis. Alcoholic cirrhosis is predominantly of the micronodular type, with nodules &lt;3mm but found uniformly over the liver.
Clinical features of alcoholic liver disease include vague symptoms, such as nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain and diarrhoea. Such symptoms are seen in alcohol withdrawal. More extensive hepatocellular damage may manifest from jaundice to hepatic failure.
Acute alcohol withdrawal is regarded as a neurological emergency and on presentation a patient's initial symptoms may include anxiety, tremor, hyperactivity, sweating, nausea, tachycardia, hypertension and mild pyrexia. These usually peak at 12-30 hours. Generalised tonic-clonic seizures may also occur during this period.
Delirium tremens (a state of confusion usually arising in alcoholics after withdrawal or abstinence from alcohol) occurs in &lt;5% of individuals usually after 3-4 days following cessation of alcohol intake. It is associated with an untreated mortality of 15%. Features include:
Coarse tremor, agitation, confusion, delusion, and hallucinations.
Fever, sweaty, tachycardia.
Rarely lactic acidosis or ketoacidosis.
Also look for hypoglycaemia, Wernicke-Korsakoff psychosis and hepatic encephalopathy.
In the guidelines for the Management of Acute Alcohol Withdrawal, Chlordiazepoxide is the drug of choice, the advantages being it is long-acting, it is safer than many alternatives (2) and dependence and addiction is reduced in chlordiazepoxide. Poor nutrition is also common in patients who drink because of inadequate intake, associated chronic liver disease, chronic pancreatitis and malabsorption. Water and fat-soluble vitamins should therefore be replaced. Thiamine and vitamins are recommended as a standard treatment (3) for the management of capture alcohol withdrawal.
In short, the treatment of alcohol withdrawal should include:
Important issues raised in this case include the issues of addiction and the health care delivery of services to help such individuals. Ms  was known to be a heavy drinker and was being treated with anti-depressants. There is an increased incidence of alcohol abuse in those who suffer from depression and health care delivery should include advice and support to such patients about managing and overcoming their problems to try and prevent hospitalisation for alcohol-related illnesses. Ethical issues include the transplantation of livers in those individuals who suffer alcohol addiction against those patients who may require a transplant that is not related to their lifestyle behaviours, although transplantation was not a direct issue in this particular case.