Michael Smith is an experienced audio engineer with many years involved with companies pioneering the leading technology. He wishes to pursue a niche in the market for audio consultancy in the expanding hi-fi separates market.
The proposal seeks to offer advice and calibration of high-end systems, both demonstrating and offering for sale many accessories at discounted costs.
The hi-fi separates sector of the audio-visual market is continually expanding, whilst sought after personal advice and service is becoming harder to come by.
Michael Smith has the training and expertise to improve and properly calibrate hi-fi systems to allow them to perform to their fullest extent. Business experience both during top degree at , and assisting in running an existing plastics factory, provide necessary skills and foresight into running and managing a business.
No investment is required as initial costs are low, and sufficient funds are available to Michael Smith. Costs in following years are low enough to be covered easily by the previous years profits.
Partnership is intended for growth within the second year, with Michael Smith maintaining ultimate control over the company.
A significant share of the audio-visual market has, for the last three decades, been commanded by hi-fi separates. Consumer research suggests that this sector of the market is still in continued growth, whilst specialised independent audio stores are on the decline. This leaves an increasing consumer base without personal and specialised service and advice. 'PRIONICS' believes a niche is developing for a consultancy-based service to offer advice and knock down products to better configure the ever more expensive systems.
'PRIONICS' proposes to offer a consultancy service for Hifi separates users, configuring systems and offering advised products to bring the most out of their cherished systems.
Using diagnostic tools and years of experience in the trade, the levels can be optimised, and speaker placement adjusted to maximise stereo separation and minimise reflections. A collection of sample products could be auditioned within the system to illustrate any benefits, the client being left with the option of purchasing these products. Various room treatment options will be also available a minimum cost, these could be fitted by the company at a later date. The team would demonstrate their benefit during consultancy.
Clients have the option of being added to the newsletter highlighting the latest and best deals on various accessories and second hand products.
There is little mention of home-call services in the Hi-fi industry at all, so if competition exists they cannot have a successful marketing strategy and 'PRIONICS' wishes to profit out of this niche. Once a client base is established, satisfied customers would through word of mouth spread the word bringing in a larger clientele. The nature of this sector of the market, high-end 'audiophile' listeners enjoy the constant refinement of their system, and 'PRIONICS' would be able to assist them in this strife. Good reviews would help market the service in itself as these are heavily relied upon by this small sector. Regular customers can then be established, some wishing to upgrade almost habitually, opening the door for part exchange and second hand dealings in the future.
'Specialist' Hi-fi retailers such as Sevenoaks and Richer sounds have had success beyond their mainstream electrical retail rivals within the audio-visual market. They touch upon the mid-range of this market, picking up from the budget that high-street retailers offers. This illustrates the growth of the sector, and the success has come in particular from the accessibility and the realisation of how low costs can really be.
As bonds strengthen within the audio community, 'PRIONICS' will expand their services at first within the existing client base. Building upon the already successful trade of second hand wares by the owner, the company can introduce a part exchange and second hand range of products. Few retailers can now accept second hand items, including Richer sounds, especially regarding speakers. 'PRIONICS' would be uniquely qualified to offer a true price for quality second's bettering the prices offered to Hi-fi enthusiasts at present, whilst increasing stock and the choice available to other clients.
In the second year, 'PRIONICS' plans to expand and take on a partner to increase the amount of consultancy possible and expand the client base. Another employee shall be recruited to help manage administrative, promotional and marketing aspects of the business.
'PRIONICS' hopes within 3 years to open a sister store specialising in the knockdown accessories and second hand components build up and maintained by PRIONICS' consultancy services.
Initially creating a good client base is foremost, as there is no store as such to attract attention; this venture relies heavily upon word of mouth and initial promotional work. The value of the service then has to be gauged and judged by the consumer, whilst the personal touch may be the edge, some clients may not be comfortable with letting strangers into their homes regarding the cost of the systems in question, and also the idea of 'PRIONICS' touching the system and offering advice on that which they take so much pride in.
The following information has been collected to validate the idea that PRIONICS can run as a viable business opportunity. The ownership of CD an Hi-fi separates accounts for nearly a quarter of the adult population. This percentage is ever increasing even today as the products filter through ever more accessible outlets.
Hi-fi separates are still leading the way in the growth of the hi-fi/stereo sector. Their sale a significant contribution for over three decades. The advent of AV has only served to increase their sales, as for true musicality, separates still offer the best solution. The sale of AV products is rising sharply, however high end AV products exist, requiring the same style of configuration, possibly more crucially to get the desired effects. This should then not be considered as competition, only additional custom as the same principles need be applied. Price erosion has merely served to expand the consumer base interested in the sector, whilst high-end products continue to expand.
Speakers are the most affluent and buoyant subsection fo the market, making up 40% of total hi-fi sales. DVD and AV has had a positive effect on the speaker market, the sale of additional speakers in the form of centre speakers and subwoofers has risen by double digits in 2000. Amps occupy about 35% of the market, and a further 30% is taken by CD separates, however CD separates have the lowest value, only commanding 15% of the market in terms of total expenditure.
This suggests that the Hi-fi market is set to increase rapidly, so 'PRIONICS' can fill this niche whilst it exists, riding the wave of interest from new consumers and establishing 'PRIONICS' as a leader in it's field.
Richer Sounds has taken full advantage of this boom, their Company Report revealing the steep increase in success of this sector within the last few years.
This shows that owners of Hi-fi separates are more interested in the technological developments and new products than other sectors. This translates into an interest in improving their system, and 'PRIONICS' can take advantage of this to advise and offer advantageous products to improve their separates system.
'PRIONICS' shall be based in the South, the most affluent area of the UK clearly has the greatest interest in purchasing audio good from specialist stores and retailers. Berkshire will serve as the ideal focal point of the company; initially running from a home office until the sister store can be created.
The cash flow for 'PRIONICS' is forecast for the first two years in Appendix 1. The cash flow is negative for the first couple of months; therefore 'PRIONICS' needs enough capital to cover these losses. The custom should quickly pick up, along with the total revenue. Tax is calculated for the projected Gross profits for both years. As a sole trader, 'PRIONICS' pays income tax on any taxable profits, and National Insurance at a rate of 8%. The second year however a partner will come on board, and 'PRIONICS' therefore is subject to corporation tax, and National Insurance costs of 2.05 per week.
Personal qualifications for Michael Smith are listed in the CV, included in Appendix 2.No property needs to be purchased for the first year, as the consultancy shall be run from home. In the second year however, premises need to be rented to conduct sales from. Costs for this would be approximately:
This would be an annual cost, coupled with the cost of staff to run the store. Initially my partner and myself would alternate shifts managing the store and making consultancy calls. The partner and a secretary shall be hired from the beginning of the second year if the business lifts off as least as well as predicted. No premises are required for this as all work can be centred at the expanded home-office that I shall invest in within the first year, and if preferable, in the back of the store in the second year.
A company van needs to be bought to transport equipment and sample stock to clients on consultancy trips. This would cost around 5000 for a smart second hand plain van. A further 500 would print the company logo and contacts around the outside of the vehicle. Depreciation maintenance and petrol costs are covered within the cash flow calculations. A second van with similar costs would then be purchased to expand the 'fleet' for the partner to use.
Diagnostic equipment costing little over 5000 must be purchased, including high-powered laptop and sensory instruments. The second year would again require a duplicate set of instruments.
Total expenditure therefore in the first year:
5,500
Rising in the second year to:
50,000
Savings, endorsement from such companies and Chord, Monster and Coalesce, as well as reasonable profits within the first year should account for costs in the second year, allowing a larger loyal client base to develop to start receiving greater profits in the third year.