The 2005 annual report is confirmed by the auditors as a true and fair account of the financial status of Renold. The evaluation of the annual report by the author of this report confirms this finding. Out of the ten performance ratios considered they all show the effects of a hard year for Renold. Adjustments made are consistent with company policy and the accounts read transparently.
On 7 In fact Renold were in the red for the first six months of this financial year. Difficulties in the automotive industry in particular with lower orders than expected from GM, have added to Renold's problems.
Management are having little success in passing on cost increases to the automotive industry. The cost reduction programme, by moving manufacture to Poland continues, but talks on starting production in China are still underway. Share prices were 59p in April 2005 following the second Renold profit warning and only dropped to 58.5 p in December 2005 despite the companies continuing problems. With no further share dividends paid since January 28
Therefore the recommendation would be to hold on to existing shares at this time. If the China talks are successful there is the possibility that Renold's position in 2006 could be greatly improved, especially if debts can also be reduced (by the sale of the Burton-on-Trent plant) as Renold management expect and the current strong order book continues.
Renold, a company specialising in the manufacture of gears, chains and other power transmission systems, have been undergoing a period of change over the last few years.
Profit levels have varied as the company has strived to survive in a competitive market, beset by disadvantageous US Dollar exchange rates, increasing raw material costs and falls in volume production in the automotive industry.
This report reviews the 2004/2005 annual report and considers the companies performance over that period, with a view to determining whether the accounts give a true and fair view, and ultimately whether investors should consider buying, selling or maintaining their current share platform.
Whilst Renold's accounts (as indicated through analysis of the performance ratios) point towards a struggling company, the current climate within the industry can explain the difficulties Renold continues to face. In this way the report offers a true and fair view of their performance throughout the year. Explanations have been given for changes in accounting standards, and the accounts appear transparent to the reader.
Renold continues to restructure, expand and outsource to cheaper economies. The first half of this financial year has seen Renold fall into the red, and continue to make losses, forcing Renold to restate predicted profits for the end of the year. The acquisition of Sachs Automotive France SAS, and the opening of the plant in Tennessee in 2005 could start to offer returns in the second half of the year. Successful talks regarding expansion into China could potentially add further substantial profits in later years. In addition Renold expect their current strong order book position to provide a good platform for continued orders throughout the year, and by selling the Burton-on-Trent plant, some loss will be recovered. Recently Renold has won a major contract to help renovate Underground stations throughout London. This should continue over many years, offering Renold a reliable volume of work.
The recommendation from this report for shareholders is to hold with their current level of investment, and they should start getting return towards the end of the year, where increased investment may require further consideration.