In depth literature reviews, of University of A limited amount of information on the principles was however obtained.
Existing fluidic and flueric devices were evaluated and remodelled, making use of current methods of manufacture and new materials. For ease and speed of manufacture rapid prototype manufacture was selected. The main disadvantage of this was that the rig overall size was restricted (200 mm x 200 mm ) by the capacity of the
Two basic systems to fluerically control the bistable switching of hydraulic or pneumatic cells were designed. The models were designed so that specific parameters could be changed, in order for their effectiveness to be evaluated. Account was taken of the need to model different fluids (air and water). The designs were kept simple the aim being to demonstrate each principle by using manual stimulation to control the flow.
The rigs were designed with variable jet input geometry, different flow channel geometries and different active flow control. The test programme, in which both fluids were tested on each rig, demonstrated that for different inlet profiles and flow channels the flow could be switched from one side wall or channel to another under controlled conditions.
This showed that switching could be triggered not randomly, but in accordance with loading or volume. Thus the flow discharge path can be controlled. This has significant potential in a number of areas, including the medical field. A number of these potential areas were identified during the literature search.
Computational analysis was carried out using commercial code STAR-CD. This was not completely successful. The computational time to complete a simple profile such as weir was roughly 10 minutes, after which time the programme produced flow patterns downstream of the weir. Work using the geometry of the rig designed for the project did run to completion (typically after a couple of hours) but failed then to produce any flow data for further analysis.
The test programme identified a number of potential areas for further investigation:-
The relationship between the dimensions of the inlet chamber to the fluid inlet pipe and the effects these have on successful jet attachment. This should include an investigation to ascertain the effect of the interaction of the fluid with the top and bottom surfaces of the device.
The Perspex lid should be redesigned to produce a better seal. There is no evidence that the existing small leakages adversely affected the test results, but this aspect of the design should be improved in future work.
Rigs of various sizes and ratios should be considered.
Impact of fluid properties should be evaluated in order to determine what if any effect they have in maintaining strong jet attachment around a surface that creates an adverse pressure gradient (i.e. to follow a convex profile).
The designed rigs demonstrate that flow attachment and flow switching can be achieved with cheap, easy to manufacture devices, with the added advantage that dimensional accuracy is not essential.
The term Fluidics can be defined as:-
"The technology of using the flows and pressures of fluids in sensing, control, and information-processing systems with no moving parts."
Within this field, all methods of flow control are covered, including conventional mechanical valves. For the purpose of this report, the broad term of fluidics must be narrowed to include only those applications with no moving parts. Such components, while satisfying the term fluidics, are part of a subcategory, fluerics.
The subject of fluerics, where flow-rates, pressures, or volumetric flows allow operators to control discharge flow paths, of any fluid, were investigated in the 1960s. There does not appear to have been significant further work in the is area in the intervening decades, though further work was carried out in related fields including aerodynamics and nanotechnology relating to flow control in recent decades.
However none of the referenced material seemed to have fully investigated how critical changes in the device dimensions or geometry may be in achieving consistent control, focussing instead upon rigid assemblies honed to provide ever more precise timing systems, or increasingly small laboratory test apparatus.
With changes in manufacturing processes, such as rapid prototyping, and new materials (suitable for use in clinical applications) and advances in medical practice, development of a workable fluidic control device could be a major breakthrough.
This paper summarises the approach and the results of the research and development carried out:-
The development phase concentrated on design, construction and testing of simple devices to demonstrate flow attachment and switching, for different fluids. The rigs were to be adaptable (i.e. geometries could rapidly be changed and tested) and be easy and cheap to manufacture.
The conclusions will be drawn in the following sections
Comments will be made in evaluation of the success of CFD within this investigation, and its shortcomings.
Success with respective models will be noted and their failures criticised, outlining their impact upon current/future development.
Evaluation of the methodology will ensue, including the level to which the projects specification has been met, and suggestions for application.