The purpose of this report is to design a system which is instrumented to give an automatic measurement of the torsion applied to a hollow steel shaft. The design incorporates four active gauges, in a full Wheatstone bridge arrangement. The applied torque provides a bridge output voltage which is proportional to the input torque. For the purpose of data acquisition, and presentation, the relatively small bridge voltage is amplified by an instrumentation amplifier, designed with a gain of 1000. A low pass filter is also introduced to reduce the high frequency noise present in the output signal. The bridge output voltage is related to the input torque by the following expression:
The torque cell is capable of measuring a maximum torsional load of approximately 2634Nm, and is designed to reject the effects of axial and bending forces, as well as the effect of temperature fluctuations on the gauge resistance.
The purpose of this report is to design a suitable system for measuring the torque which is applied to a hollow steel shaft, as shown in figure 1.
The torque can be applied to the shaft by adding weights to the steel bar attached to the free end of the hollow section. The principal objective is to design a system which allows the rig to be instrumented to give an automatic measurement of the torque, based on a strain gauge arrangement.
The system is to be designed to provide an output signal, which is representative of the input torque. The measurement system should be made insensitive to temperature changes, and other loading effects, such as axial/bending forces, and provide a means for calibration along with some form of data presentation.
The basic concept behind the proposed measurement system is shown diagrammatically below:
As the torque is applied, one or more strain gauges located on the shaft, will deform under stress, and this deformation will cause the gauge resistance to change. By incorporating the gauges into a bridge circuit, this change in resistance can be converted into a voltage. Since the bridge output voltage will be relatively minute, a suitable operational amplifier circuit can be included to amplify the output voltage to a level which allows the signal to be presented, or processed further.
With the basic concept described above, there are numerous considerations which can be made in order to provide the most effective measurement system. The design considerations are explained in the following pages.
The following is a number of factors which must be considered, with respect to the initial concept described above. These factors should provide the most effective measurement system, based around the brief principles discussed.
In order for the devised system to be used practically, an understanding of the relationship between the inputs and outputs of the system must be achieved.
The St. Venant Torsion expression for a round shaft gives the following:
 4
Rearranging equation 4 in terms of the shear stress gives the following:
 5
For a hollow circular section, the polar second moment of area (J) is expressed by:
 6
Therefore, the maximum shear stress applied to the hollow shaft can be given by substituting equation 6 into equation 5, to give the following:
 7
By substituting the dimensional characteristics of the shaft (see page 3), into equation 7, the shear stress can be expressed in terms of the torque alone. This expression is shown below:
 8
Where
The principal strain, By substituting equation 8 into this relationship, the principal strain can be expressed in terms of the torque, Poisson ratio and the Young's Modulus of the shaft material. This expression is shown below:
 9
Where C=1851177
In the above analysis, it is evident that the sensitivity of the torque cell is dependant upon the Poisson ratio, along with the young's modulus of the material. In the design specification, the shaft used is described as steel, which offers the following properties:
When any of the four strain gauges on the shaft are subjected to a force, the gauge itself undergoes an extension in length, and the cross section is reduced. The effect of this deformation, acts to alter the gauge resistance. The sensitivity of the gauges is expressed as the percentage change in resistance which occurs under a given strain. This is expressed algebraically below:
 10
The gauge factor, and initial resistance can be found in appendix A. By substituting these values into equation 10, along with the expression for strain given in equation 9, an overall expression for the relationship between torque and resistance change can be derived:
From Appendix A,
 11
Where C=1851177
Finally, an expression can be derived, relating the bridge output voltage, to the input torque. From equation 2 (page 6), the bridge circuit is modelled by:
From equation 11 (page 11), the change in gauge resistance can be substituted into this equation, along with the parameter R, to give an expression relating the bridge output to the input torque:
 12
Where C=1851177
The design brief indicates that the shaft is made from steel, and so values of the Poisson ratio and young's modulus can be entered into the above equation, which yields the following:
 13
If can also be assumed that the bridge circuit will be supplied by a simple 9V battery, and so the bridge output is related to the input torque by the following expression:
 14
It is now evident from equation 14, that the bridge output voltage will be considerably small with respect to the torque. However, the amplifier circuit designed on page 9 will amplify this output voltage by a factor of approximately 1000, and thus allowing the signal to be processed further.
In summary of all the design considerations made in pages 5 through 10, the complete system diagram can be constructed as follows:
In order for the system to be used for measuring torque, it must be possible to calibrate the system, and for the output signal to be presented by a suitable media. For this purpose, digitisation of the output signal is ideal, as it allows the signal to be displayed, and/or processed, by a computer. This method involves using a data-acquisition system, consisting of an analogue-digital card, connected to a PC. After digitising the signal, a software program such as Labview (By National Instruments The advantage of using a computer for data acquisition, allows further processing to be made more simply. The output signal can be related to the torque variable using equation 14, and the data can easily be presented by any means from a simple pointer-scale indicator to a LED or LCD display.
In order to calibrate the measurement system, a known input torque can be applied to the shaft, to confirm the relationship between the input torque and the output voltage. The torque can be applied by placing standard weights to the beam attached to the free end of the shaft. The strain gauge bridge circuit also includes a potential divider, which will allow the systems output to be zeroed, when no load is applied to the shaft. This eliminates the initial torque which is a result of the steel beam's own mass providing a torsional force on the shaft.
The measurement system is limited in its range of operation, primarily by the strain gauges used. The strain gauge specification provided in appendix A, indicates the maximum measurable strain lies between 3 and 4%. The principle strain has already been defined by equation 9, and is as follows:
Therefore, if the strain is limited to 3% (0.03), the maximum allowable torque can be expressed by the following:
The maximum strain which can be measured by the gauges corresponds to a maximum torque of 2634 Nm, which can be applied to the shaft.
This range of the torque cell's operation is also limited by the shaft geometry, particularly the inner and outer radii. By increasing the second moment of area of the section, the maximum allowable torque would also increase.
The designed system can easily be tested for linearity by measuring the output produced by two individual masses, and comparing this to the output provided by a weight with the combined mass of the two. The sum of the two readings should be equal to the reading of the combined mass. This test will confirm the quality of the system in delivering identical sensitivity throughout its measuring range.
As for the sensitivity of the system, this is dependant upon the shaft geometry, the shaft material, the gauge factor, and the Wheatstone bridge voltage (Vs). By simply changing the type of gauge, to platinum tungsten for instance, the gauge factor can easily be increased from 2 to 4, therefore doubling the sensitivity of the system. However, this modification would be expensive, and realistically, could only be implemented if cost effectiveness was not an issue.
The bridge output voltage has already been defined by the following expression:
Based on this expression, a shaft with a smaller Young's Modulus will create a greater voltage difference, for a given torque. Similarly, if the supply voltage to the bridge (currently set at 9V) was increased, the sensitivity of the system would also increase. Conversely, any increase in bridge voltage, may produce more heat, and hence the bridge will become more susceptible to temperature. Therefore the sensitivity of the system may be increased at the expense of accuracy.
The accuracy of the system depends primarily on the sensor's ability to be insensitive to other loading effects, such as axial forces and bending forces. Due to the method of applying the torque to the shaft, there will be a resultant bending force caused by the hanging weights. Similarly, temperature fluctuations affecting the gauge resistance will also act as a source of errors in the measurement. However, in the four gauge bridge, axial and bending forces are rejected because the effect of these loads is cancelled out by the gauges in adjacent arms of the bridge. Similarly in terms of temperature fluctuation, since all four gauges will experience the same temperature, the bridge remains balanced and the error is eliminated.
The overall system provides a linear relationship between the applied torque, and the bridge output voltage, and is expressed by the following equation:
For every Newton-Metre of torque applied, there is a bridge output voltage of 0.205mV produced. Therefore, there is an overall sensitivity of 0.205mV/Nm in the designed system.
The torque measurement system could be improved by upgrading some of the elements of the system, however upgrading these parts results in a decrease in cost efficiency. The gain of the amplifier circuit could be increased further to improve the signal to noise ratio, which will produce more reliable results. The type of strain gauge could be upgraded to a type offering a greater gauge factor, which would increase the sensitivity of the measurement system. In addition, the measurable strain of the gauges could be increased with different gauges, and hence the range of operation could be improved.
The bridge output is related to the input torque by the following equations:
The latter, indicates the system sensitivity, with respect to the design parameters which have been chosen. Therefore, it is possible to increase the sensitivity by reducing the Young's Modulus of the material, and increasing the Poisson ratio. However, the principal strain is also related to the torque by the following:
Therefore, if the Young's Modulus was reduced in order to increase the sensitivity, it would have a negative effect on the range of the torque cell, as the strain produced would be greater for a given torque, and the maximum torque would be limited. Depending on the requirements of the system, it is possible for the shaft properties to be adjusted to allow for a greater measuring range, or for greater sensitivity.