The human skin provides an essential barrier to the environment, preventing the transport of substances to and from the human body. In order to extract blood for the purpose of sampling and diagnosis, the skin's natural barrier must be overcome. As a relatively painless alternative to hypodermic injections, microneedle arrays have been fabricated using microstereolithography (MSL) techniques, which may be capable of penetrating the skin and increasing its permeability. This is expected to facilitate the extraction of blood and allow efficient transfer of drugs across the skin.
In this study, a number of needle designs were fabricated from a biocompatible photopolymer, with a variety of needle geometries. Using finite element simulations, and experimental techniques, the performance of each design was determined by modelling the force required to fracture the microneedles. Experimental data estimated a range of failure forces from 0.205 - 0.292 N and these forces were shown to depend primarily on the radius of the needle tip.
By fabricating the microneedle arrays using a single photon STL process, this study provides an economical means of producing microneedle arrays for the process of blood extraction and/or drug delivery.
This study demonstrates that microneedle arrays can be fabricated using a single STL process, to produce a variety of microneedle designs directly from 3D CAD data. A finite element analysis was performed to determine the optimal design parameters. The strength of a design was found to depend primarily on the radius of the needle tip, and the presence of a bore was found to only marginally lower the failure force. The finite element analysis was also applied to model the interaction between the microneedle arrays and a human skin model. Results have shown that the polymer microneedle arrays may be able to penetrate the skin before failing, however due to the non-linear nature of the human skin, a precise assessment could not be made without an actual skin insertion test. By optimising the parameters of the fabrication process, microneedle arrays were able to be produced efficiently, with a variety of geometry and features. These microneedle arrays were tested by both computer simulation, and by a spring loaded test rig. The failure forces observed varied from 0.205-0.263 N. Due to the ductile nature of the polymer used in fabrication, needle breakages were found to be uncommon indicating that the microneedles are safe, and would carry minimal risk of injury.