Five experiments were carried out to investigate the properties and uses of ultrasound waves in solids. Longitudinal waves were passed through two metal blocks to determine their longitudinal moduli, M, and Poisson's ratios, For the aluminium block, M was (101 For the mild steel block, M was (264.5 The echoes of longitudinal waves were also used to detect and size defects in an aluminium block, which proved successful as four defects were found. Shear waves were then produced from reflected longitudinal waves and were measured to have a velocity of (3500 Their angle of reflection and velocity were then tested against a version of Snell's Law, which proved inconclusive. Longitudinal waves were totally internally reflected to produce surface waves, the velocity of which was measured to be 2860ms The wavelength of a surface wave is proportional to energy, which is related to the depth of the wave, so by passing the waves through a slot of varying depths, its wavelength was found, with a value of (0.98
In each part of the experiment, an ultrasound signal generator was connected to a PC oscilloscope (so the signal could be seen) and a transducer. For many of the experiments an additional 'receiver' transducer was connected to another channel of the oscilloscope, which picked up the pulse once it had travelled through the sample. The transducers and the samples were assembled as shown in figure 5
The delay-time facility on the oscilloscope enables the time between wave transmission and reflection to be determined. The pulse was set at slowest rate so that the subsequent transmitted pulse wasn't shown on the oscilloscope before the first reflection. All time errors in this investigation are due to the pulse having multiple peaks (fig. 6). Also, the errors were based on the accuracy to which it was possible to read from the oscilloscope so try to and minimise the error the timebase was set to the smallest readable value.
All distances measured in the experiment were generally measured using vernier scale callipers as these are more accurate than a ruler. All distance errors were based on the callipers' accuracy, unless otherwise stated. In graphs, the errors for the gradients were all calculated in 'Origin'
Throughout the experiments the velocity = displacement/time relationship was used if velocities, lengths or depths needed to be found.
Two types of transducers were used (but never together in one experiment): 5MHz longitudinal wave transducers and wedge transducers. The former were cylindrical, with a circular base juxtaposed with the sample. The latter were as shown in figure 7.