The conquest of Mexico poses a complex problem in history: how is it possible that a small band of Spanish explorers were able to conquer a Mesoamerican warlike and powerful society, on their own territory, in the space of just two years? As Prescott argues, 'There is probably no instance in history where so vast an enterprise has been achieved by means apparently so inadequate'. Historians researching this period have put numerous other explanations forward. However, within the course of theories on military supremacy, victory by 'signs' and the part played by disease transfer, one enduring theme has been that it was Hern Yet this is by no means a confirmed notion and is surrounded by years of historical debate.
An important factor one must consider within this framework is how we know about and understand these events. For many years Spanish accounts held a complete monopoly and Cort More recently emerging accounts taken from the Indian perspective have admittedly gone some way to redress the balance. However such post-conquest records, laden with omen and prophecy are not enough to explain the Spanish success, and the fact remains that the best records we have (and those which historians have tended to refer to) are Cort
This reliance upon select accounts has created the potential for bias in our understanding of the role played by different factors in the conquest. It is fairly obvious an assumption to say that, in his commentary, Cort This seems particularly illuminating when one considers that Cort
However Cort As his personal secretary and, as many historians have pointed out, somebody who was not actually present during the conquest, G D
However, Iglesia argues that it too suffers similar problems of bias, this time being coloured by the desire to increase awareness of the role played by the ordinary soldiers. Underlying his narrative is the continual presence of resentment towards the idea that Cort As a result, in his efforts to discredit this work, D D In general one would probably say no, war not being the time for democracy and debate, but it is possible that those who participated in conquest expeditions were treated in different manner to the ordinary soldier. Perhaps because Cort
We are thus reminded that any conclusions drawn as to the role of Cort All of the main chroniclers wrote for 'specific objectives' As Iglesia points out, the way in which evidence is arranged can alter the way it is perceived, and thus no writer can ever be entirely impartial because it is they who choose this arrangement However, we cannot afford to neglect these chronicles, despite their subjectivity, not only because of their capacity for description but also because they are all we have by which to comprehend the events.
In order to clarify the space within which this essay is situated I have chosen to define the 'conquest' as being the period between when Cort Others may view the conquest period as including the aftermath of the defeat, the conquest of Indian religion and way of life perhaps, but here I will concentrate upon this first and most crucial act of Spanish conquest in Mexico.
It has been noted that Cort However the importance of his leadership in many other elements of the conquest is undeniable. Prescott argues that Cort It would indeed appear that his pivotal role lies in his ability to inspire his men to fight so determinedly for his cause. Uneasiness about his plans certainly existed among his followers and thus Cort D To give an example, unrest spreads among those loyal to Valezquez once Cort Yet Cort
Cort Common among the chronicles are battle cries that infer unity behind a common cause, "Saint James and Spain" being an example. Cort
Clendinnen calls Cort Cort For example, during his first contact with the natives, Cort They do attempt this sort of use of signs later, when they sacrifice Spanish captives within eyeshot, but fail because of their poorer grasp of the cultural differences between the groups. Rather than scare away the Spanish, with their linear way of thinking, such behaviour served only to increase the Spanish desire to complete their ultimate goal in conquering the city.
Cort Although his letters reflect a sombre mood during retreat, on reaching safety as Tlaxcala, Cort D These ships prove crucial to the final battles because they allow the Spanish to attack the natives in water, where they are at their most vulnerable.
Equally as crucial was Cort He makes a tactical decision to go out and meet him, despite the risk of leaving the city in the hands of the least reliable soldiers. Through clever manipulation Cort What could have been disastrous for the conquest thus becomes one of Cort With Narvaez' men on side, Cort In his determination to meet his ultimate goal, he undertakes risky measures in order to maximise his gains, for example by destroying the ships in which they arrived, an act that his supporters view as one of his most remarkable.
Cort Cort As Elliott suggests, he seems to have had an 'extraordinary capacity to size up a situation and turn it to account'. To lead such a 'motley congregation'
However, one might argue that, despite possessing the qualities of a great leader, Cort The tendency, after events occur, to credit people with having followed a clear policy to reach such conclusions is also greater than usual with Cort It is clear that not all of what unfurled was the result of calculation by the Spanish leader from the fact that he was forced to destroy Tenochitlan in order to capture it. While the conquest is completed under his direction then, it is probably not in a way in which Cort
The story of the conquest is by no means straightforward. Many other factors seem to have operated to the Spanish advantage and it might be argued that these are at least equally as important to the conquest as Cort For example, constrained by his religion's emphasis upon prophecy and cyclical development, the Aztec leader's understanding of the unfolding events was limited to what his society had previously dealt with, in encounters with other Mesoamerican powers. As a result he found himself incapable of producing effective messages in order to repel the Spanish. From a Mexican standpoint this would be seen to demonstrate the great power of the Aztec empire, a technique used to strike fear into any potential enemies. Yet in coming up against the Europeans, whose belief system works on an entirely different basis, this message is lost. Moctezuma's actions perhaps indicated an indecisive ruler, a fatal flaw in competition with Cort
Many historians view Moctezuma's fatal mistake as believing that the Spanish might be returning gods D This perhaps created the sense of inevitability that made Moctezuma's response to the newcomers so meagre. Although this does not account for the losses in the second phase of conquest, it was possibly what gained the Spanish entry into the city. This gave Cort
That this belief was key to the conquest focuses upon certain accounts of Aztec society before the Spanish arrival, namely Book Twelve of the Florentine Codex, which create a Moctezuma overcome by the fear that Cort Townsend suggests that the story of the returning god was created
It is difficult to argue exactly what Moctezuma intended through any of his actions towards the Spanish. For example, was his cooperation in Spanish captivity an attempt to secure his city, based on his knowledge of the Spanish ferocity in battle with other tribes, as Townsend suggests We will probably never know because it appears that he confided in very few, and those he did were most likely killed during the fighting. As such then we have no reliable source from which to grasp Moctezuma's state of mind, given the problems of bias in the Spanish accounts. However, that he was constrained in his responses by the nature of his religion seems likely. Prescott provides evidence for this in arguing that Moctezuma's commitment to 'all the burdensome ceremonial of the Aztec worship' That Cort
Eliott argues that the conquest was 'as much a revolt by a subjugated population against its overlords' Cort Cort Equally their lands offer shelter and an invaluable opportunity for the Europeans to regain strength after their expulsion. It is perhaps true to say, then, that, 'A few hundred Spaniards became an unbeatable force only when combined with thousands of indigenous pouring in behind them'.
That these allies were one of the most crucial elements in the Spanish success is virtually indisputable. However, their presence does not necessarily detract from the idea that Cort It was his skills as a communicator that extracted the information necessary to learn of the internal divisions among the native population As Prescott eloquently argues, in gaining the native allies, Cort
Perhaps the most obvious advantage that lay before the invaders was their vast military superiority in terms of weaponry and formations. As Elliott indicates, the horse provided the Spanish with both a greater mobility and, at least initially, the opportunity to surprise and unsettle their enemies. The 'slings, bows and arrows'
The different battle techniques used and, more importantly, understood were perhaps even more critical to the Spanish success. 'Just as there are two forms of communication, there are two forms of war' For example, the Europeans were more accustomed at producing the protective formations in battle that limit losses The ritualistic style of native warfare and warrior dress, with soldiers 'gaudily painted' and chiefs glittering with helmets made of gold and jewels, meant that they could not be prepared to fight at any given moment, and also that they were more easily spotted on the battlefield.
Never were these different practices of warfare so crucial as during the final siege, when Cort The great anguish this caused is measurable from its volume of references in native sources: in illustration, "Nothing can compare with the horrors of that siege and the agonies of the starving." To the Aztec peoples, to involve civilians in this way was the very antithesis of warfare, and had no part in their experience of it.
The Indians saw 'signs' on the battlefield that the Spanish did not, omens that destroyed their ability to fight. To give an example, Spanish sources cite the fall of the Indian commander at the battle of Otumba as the reason for their success, but it probably more likely the taking of the banner that signified for the natives that the battle was lost. Although Aztecs did gradually learn to adapt in the face of European weaponry, for example by beginning to kill on the battlefield, their belief system would only allow this up to a certain point and thus they remained at a disadvantage.
As clearly, then, as we can see its effect on Moctezuma's behaviour, religion plays a central role in other areas of life. The use of a cyclical calendar meant that the Aztec world was an over-determined one, and they were incapable of understanding anything as a unique event. In short, in both messages and actions, on the battlefield and beyond, the natives were unable to improvise in the face of the unparalleled behaviour enacted by the Spanish, and the mastery of adaptation presented by their leader. Such baffling of the Indians, more than any deliberate or intended policy, worked to knock them off balance.
Meanwhile, for the Spanish, absolute faith in the superiority of their culture and in particular their religion, gives them a unique edge in many situations. The sense that their mission was in the name of God created an inner confidence among the Spanish that allowed them to exploit the weaknesses of their enemies without fear or guilt.
Unlike the leaders of the Aztec army, bound by their ritualised conduct of war, Cort In short, the religion of the Aztecs, more likely to inspire resignation to death than to glory, was a poor match for Christianity For the Spanish, religion offered a motivation, justification and giver of confidence with the knowledge that God is on their side. For the Aztecs, on the other hand, the requirement for ritualised practices, and also its emphasis on omen and inevitability, places them in a position from which it is much harder to defend. A good illustration of this can be found in
In addition one must pause to acknowledge the importance of disease to the fall of Tenochitlan. During the period in which Cort Of course, this did affect both sides in terms of men available to fight, as many of Cort However the Aztecs, who relied on sheer manpower to overwhelm the technology of the Spanish, felt its effect far more keenly. The massive effect smallpox had on the Aztecs is clear from the way in which they subsequently counted the years from it. This bacteriological warfare, albeit the responsibility of the Spanish, was another
One's conclusions, then, about the role of Cort Although common soldiers undeniably carried out the conquest, it is perhaps unlikely that they could have done so without the presence of Cort
Cort His talent for great speeches, filled with words of honour and religious commitment, not only saved him the loss of potential deserters at many points throughout the campaign, but also roused confidence in his leadership. Many of the ideas Cort Yet it was Cort Thus, to give an example, while the Spanish must be viewed as forever indebted to their Indian allies, it was Cort
As a leader, his determination never waned, even after his troops' expulsion from Mexico, and all negotiations were carried out by him. Cort His ability to adapt to whatever circumstances lay before him was perhaps his most commanding talent and saved the conquest from termination and disaster at many points, such as after the Noche Triste or on the arrival of Narvaez.
It seems likely that this improvisation, in the face of the Aztec ritualised way of understanding, was what offered the Spanish their chance of success. Although the Europeans military superiority was vast, and disease weakened their opposition, they perhaps might have been defeated if the Aztecs, and more importantly perhaps, Moctezuma, had been able to modify their behaviour and responses with changed circumstances, in the way that Cort Perhaps paralysed by the belief that Cort Where Cort
What D We must attempt to see a real commander rather than the literary hero figure we hold in our imagination, a man who was indeed assisted by what fate provided him, but who still exemplifies extraordinary tenacity, ability to inspire and sharp-witted improvisation. Even though other crucial factors tended to fall to the Spanish advantage, without a figure of this ability leading the expedition, it seems likely that, at one of the several occasions where the Spanish are left vulnerable, the conquest would have been aborted. The story of the conquest is therefore inevitably the story of Cort