The fall of the Bastille in July 1789 marked the beginning of what was to become a cataclysmic course of events in the history of France: the French Revolution. The political, social and cultural landscape of the French nation was so irrevocably transformed by the course of the Revolution that by 1795, the end of the period under scrutiny, it was barely recognisable from the absolute monarchical France of 1784.
The effects of the Revolution reached out into all corners of life; culture as well as politics took on novel forms. The subject of artistic and cultural works from this period should not be treated as 'autonomous phenomenon'; they provide a unique insight into the extent of its upheaval. In undertaking an intensive analysis of the themes and principles given attention in the most influential paintings of this era, a social history of Revolutionary art can be formed. In contrast to traditional art history, such an approach can help the viewer to understand these pieces as both products and, at times, producers of the Revolutionary milieu.
The period in question incorporates what might be seen as three broad stages of the French Revolution. The first, 1784-89, in truth preceded the commencement of the Revolution. However, the significance of these years cannot be underestimated, for it is during this time that the environment took shape into which the Revolution could explode in 1789. As such, debate rages between art historians as to whether the influential paintings of this period can be said to anticipate the principles that were to become those espoused by revolutionaries by the end of the 1780s. With hindsight perhaps leading one to believe that the artistic context might well be expected to indicate the origins of the Revolution, it is important to analyse the extent to which these paintings truly represent a rupture from the past. Republican imagery comes to the fore as the most crucial element in need of attention, arguably being used to uphold and promote the Bourbon monarchy or, by contrast, to indicate the need for an alternative form of governance.
The years 1789-92 represent the most optimistic of the French Revolution. The formation of a National Assembly incorporating the nobility, clergy and Third Estate, and the design of a constitution which handed sovereignty to the body of the people, inspired feelings of fraternity and patriotism amongst the nation's new political leaders. Painting similarly intercepted such ideals, reflecting the atmosphere of unity and optimism.
The final stage under scrutiny here represents something of a turning point in the history of the French Revolution. Growing suspicions about the King's support for the Constitution, confirmed by the flight attempt aborted at Varennes, coupled with growing military crisis, led to the forced removal of the monarchy on 10 August. The subsequent creation of the National Convention marked the first step towards initiating the period known as the Terror, during which many thousands were executed by guillotine for crimes against the nation. Intense fears of counter-revolution meant these years became characterised by surveillance, suspicion and violence, all in the name of upholding the new French Republic. In response, painting was called upon to promote Revolutionary values with much greater intensity, its task to guarantee the maintenance of public support. By 1794, it was seen as a critical form of propaganda for the Revolutionary government.
It is clear that this period is crucial to understanding the role that paintings played in the Revolution. In revealing the potential of painting to take on a variety of roles related to the Revolutionary cause, a focus on this ten-year period enables one to appreciate the multi-layered task it fulfilled. It easily justifies in-depth study alone, without delving into the equally fascinating work carried out under the Directory and after the Restoration.
This study will focus upon the most influential paintings by Jacques-Louis David, with pieces by other artists used as additional illustration. This concentration is not without due cause. Almost as soon as the Revolution began, David emerged as its 'official painter'. Huge debate exists around whether his influential Oath of the Horatii and Brutus and the Lictors represent pre-Revolutionary paintings. In addition, David's artistic, and later political, involvement with the French Revolution was significant. He drew upon his expertise to 'popularise the cause of the Revolution' and his paintings are seen to represent the most significant attempt at Revolutionary propaganda. As Tocqueville asserted, cultural leaders became 'a power in the land' during the Revolution, and as a result of his (albeit disputed) role in overcoming the restricted modes of political expression in ancien rgime France, David was one of the most significant. As Honour indicates, he came to be seen as 'the perfect political artist'.
Finally, in discussing the role of French painting in this era, it is important to emphasise that only the more public forms are under scrutiny. David's school of morally thematic paintings represent only one part of the art produced during the Revolution. Other important developments, such as the growth of portraiture in response to a new market-based cultural environment, will not be covered here. The concern is specifically the role played by painting in influencing, reflecting and guiding the development of the Revolution, and as such will focus on the paintings commissioned by government, alongside the most influential and controversial of the period.
Here we analyse the period leading up to the Revolution of 1789. It was during this time that the style of painting known as Neoclassicism came to the fore, seen in particular in the work of Jacques-Louis David. By adopting this style, many of the concepts that were to become central to the Revolution entered into David's paintings, and as such he can be said to have anticipated it. Some art historians suggest it is misleading to make this link. They point out the absence of a revolutionary ethos in France in the years before the Revolution, and suggest that associations have developed as a result of the course taken by David, and the Revolution itself, after 1789.
However, first we look to evidence of the incorporation of those principles soon to become Revolutionary, in the most influential paintings of this period, David's Oath of the Horatii and Brutus and the Lictors.
The relationship between David's most influential paintings and the Revolution thus becomes much clearer, full and less disputed during the course of this next period. As Roberts indicates, the concept of the nation was vital to the Revolution of 1789. Its reconfiguration in line with the concept of the general will meant that the people became a sovereign whole, and as a result the ideals of unity, harmony and fraternity became a foundation of Revolutionary rhetoric. These principles are reflected by the ideological shift in Neoclassical painting that takes place between 1789 and 1792. David's interest in the themes surrounding the subversion of the individual to the collective undergoes a radicalisation in the service of the Revolution, and as a result, the relationship between his work and the French Revolution is no longer problematic.
His unfinished Tennis Court Oath (fig. 8) powerfully illustrates the growth in unity between the principles of the Revolution and David's painting. As Crow points out, its 'conception, subject, and patronage... together cross a decisive boundary that divides Revolutionary art from even the most provocative images produced under the Old Regime." Although some of the imagery of the Tennis Court Oath suggests a harking back to antique models, its sense of immediacy means that it seems to have been designed with the specific aim of reflecting the ideals of the new French nation.
The relationship between David's work and the course of the Revolution becomes most direct during the last three years of the period under scrutiny. Following the destruction of the monarchy on 10 August, 1792, came the installation of the National Convention, armed with the task of constructing a constitution for the new French Republic. Facing rising fears of counterrevolution from within the country, the Convention, under Robespierre's lead, initiated a period characterised by high levels of suspicion, violence and surveillance.
In justifying the Terror, the Convention increasingly made propaganda and promotion a central feature of their policy. Seeing in artistic forms the potential to 'reach and influence a large number of the population', painters were enlisted to help maintain public support for the Revolution. David played a fundamental role in the progress of this period, with both his politics and art becoming increasingly tied into securing the Republic. His roles on the Committee of Public Safety and as artistic director of Revolutionary festivals meant that David became part of the apparatus of Terror, a mechanism upholding the Revolution. From being the 'official painter' of the Revolution, that is, the artist reflecting its progressive ideals, David evolved into something of an "official promoter". He not only utilised his own pieces for propaganda purposes but also mobilised other artists to similarly illustrate their devotion to the new regime. His paintings of revolutionary martyrs Lepelletier, Marat and Joseph Bara, in particular, played a critical propagandist role in illustrating the virtue found in support of the nation.
The French Revolution represented more than just a political upheaval. It was a fundamental rupture from the past, which uprooted the social and cultural landscape of the ancien rgime, and replaced it with an environment shaped by the Revolution's own principles of freedom, virtue and the nation. Artistic forms did not operate autonomously from the changing consciousness of the French nation, instead becoming a fundamental force within the Revolutionary milieu. Painting, and in particular the public form favoured by Jacques-Louis David, played a critical role in producing and propagating a cultural context unique to the age of Revolution.
As Roberts indicates, from 1784 onwards, David's paintings seem to have captured the progress of the Revolution. They chart its inception as the realisation of the "enlightened" principles espoused by the eighteenth-century philosophes, all the way through (and beyond the period under scrutiny) to the 'bitter sequel' represented by the Bourbon Restoration. Within these paintings, then, one can read 'the transfer of political power, the passage from monarchy to republic'. However, the role carried out by David's work encompassed more than a static reflection of the events associated with the Revolution. By understanding his pieces as the visual representation of three distinct stages within the Revolutionary age, it is revealed that both the purpose, and the moral role, of painting was transformed during the course of the Revolution. It is this artistic evolution that David's work captures with unique brilliance.
The years 1784-89 represent the foundations of the Revolution. It was within this period that the consciousness of the French people, drawing from the political philosophy of the European enlightenment, developed to incorporate the crucial Revolutionary concept of the nation. David's Oath of the Horatii and Brutus are indicative of the ambiguity and uncertainty that characterised this political moment. They significantly portray many of the principles that became central to the Revolutionary ethos, in particular focusing on the subversion of the personal to civic duty. In doing so, these paintings have been hailed as having anticipated the onset of a revolution that would uproot monarchical sovereignty. However, in debating the "Republican" nature of David's work during this period, historians have revealed the role played by historic retrospect in this pronouncement. Rather than directly indicating the principles of the Revolution, David's Horatii and Brutus are a representation of the atmosphere of late eighteenth-century France. They depict concepts associated with the Enlightenment, those present within public perception, which became synonymous with the Revolution only after its onset in 1789. The relationship between painting in the years 1784-89 and the Revolution is, therefore, one of indirect anticipation.
As Honour points out, 'The French Revolution was a complex series of events, in fact a succession of overlapping revolutions with different origins and aims." The role played by David's most influential paintings, in the years 1789-94, denote this complexity. The relevance of the Horatii and Brutus to contemporary events played a significant role in the recognition of David as the 'official artist' of the Revolution. From this point, as Roberts indicates, he 'put his brush in service of the new regime." His Tennis Court Oath, with its emphasis upon the themes of fraternity and self-sacrifice, is a relatively straightforward reflection of the atmosphere of the early Revolution. With the king's support for a constitution secured, the revolutionaries of 1789 were optimistic about its success in uniting the French nation as a sovereign people. Artistic forms were thus called upon to perform little other than a reproduction of the moment.
When one compares the Tennis Court Oath with David's martyr paintings of the years 1782-84, it becomes clear that painting had no explicit role in upholding the early Revolution. The onset of the Terror meant that the idealised goals represented in the paintings of 1789-92 became increasingly divergent from Revolutionary reality. In a period characterised by surveillance, control and violent retribution, art became a crucial means of propaganda. David's role evolved to become the producer of images used to promote the Revolution, and thus to help uphold the Republic.
In consequence, David's paintings increasingly focused upon Revolutionary virtue. The serene quality found within the Lepelletier, Marat and Bara, played a fundamental role in emphasising the idea that virtue was found only in the sacrifice of the individual on behalf of the nation. By promoting Revolutionary morality as something of a supernatural state, these paintings served as promotional propaganda. David helped to justify the growing coerciveness of the political moment, by means of an increasing avoidance of its realistic portrayal within his paintings, a technique that reached its peak in the Bara of 1794.
David, it would appear, was able 'to produce a style to meet the needs of the historical moment'. His most influential paintings not only form a timeline charting the progress of the French Revolution, but more than this, they have an active, evolving and dependent relationship with it. The events of 1789-92 brought meaning to his Horatii and Brutus, which has since sparked ferocious debate over their "republican" nature. The progression, from political optimism to political divorcement, found within the Tennis Court Oath, throughout the course of David's martyr paintings, and ending with the Death of Joseph Bara, symbolises the 'springtime and sanguinary crisis of the Revolution'. These pieces indicate the evolution of David's relationship to the Revolution: from being its official painter he became a mediator of propaganda upholding the Republic.
In conclusion, David's paintings represent the dominant examples of public art found within French painting between 1784 and 1794. They symbolise the power of an artistic form to influence, replicate and guide a political moment. Within the Horatii and Brutus, David was able to anticipate the vital Revolutionary concept of the sovereign nation, by synthesising the political consciousness of the pre-1789 era. In the Tennis Court Oath, he created a reflection of the centrality of fraternity and self-sacrifice, depicting the optimism that characterised the Revolution in the years 1789-92. Finally, his martyr paintings, the Lepelletier, Marat and Bara, helped uphold the French Republic of 1792-94, by promoting the transcendence found in Revolutionary virtue. The paintings of Jacques-Louis David represent the best example of an artistic record that charts the changing nature of political consciousness within the French Revolution.