Sir Guenter Treitel in his textbook The factor which distinguishes contractual from other legal obligations is that they are based on the agreement of the contracting parties'. The law of contract is therefore, a mutual exchange of requirements, where each party has to do something to make the agreement legally binding. In order for a contract to exist, it is subjected to a number of important formalities. First, there must me an offer and the offer must be accepted. Then, both parties must provide consideration and have an intention to create legal relations. Both parties must also have the capacity to create a contract. Finally, the purpose of the contract must be valid.
Upon advising Workwell Ltd on the legal implications of the events stated, we must first understand the concept of tender under the eye of contract law. A tender is competitive offer to provide goods and services. It is held in  The general principle is that an invitation to submit tender is not an offer but considered as an invitation to treat. Invitation to treat is merely an invitation to others to make offers to you. Hence, the invitation to tender is not an offer but the production of the tender is the offer, which can be accepted or rejected. If accepted, this is the binding contract.
In the case of Workwell Ltd. and the Highroad plc, it is established that Workwell Ltd. is bound by the contract because Highroad plc had invited tenders for the civil engineering project and Workwell Ltd. responded by giving an offer of a quote calculated based on Drainklear's price. Then, the offer was accepted by Highroad plc when they awarded Workwell Ltd. with the Highroad contract. Here, the contract is said to exist and that there is However, to be legally binding, acceptance must fulfil three rules. Acceptance therefore must be a 'mirror image' These rules are seen to be fulfilled by Highroad plc.
Furthermore, it is enforceable that there is consideration on both parties in order to have a valid contract. It is ascertained that there was an executory consideration on both parties. Executory consideration is a promise to give consideration in the future. Here, the consideration given by Workwell Ltd. is the promise to carry out the civil engineering job and the consideration given by Highroad plc is the promise to pay. Besides that, based on the general rule of the courts, commercial deal or business agreement intend to create legal relations. It is also highly likely that both Workwell Ltd and Highroad plc to sue each other if either party breaks the agreement since it involves quite a sum of money. Finally, both parties have the capacity to make the contract, that is both parties were not forced into the contract and the contract is further said to be valid because the purpose is legal and not immoral which go against public policy.
However, Workwell Ltd may decide to argue that they only submitted a 'quote' which does not constitute an offer. But, in
Subsequently, before dealing with the second case involving Workwell Ltd and Drainklear, we must again analyse the formalities of a contract. In this case, when Workwell Ltd. invited tenders, Drainklear made an offer by submitting a price of Clearly, offer was made in writing which also mentioned that the 'tender is open for acceptance within 3 months'. This offer which is open for acceptance within 3 months is not legally binding as it is gratuitous. Workwell Ltd. has provided no consideration in return. In Workwell Ltd. has promised nothing in return and Drainklear, the offeror is therefore free to withdraw or revoke the promise at anytime before the offer is accepted which in this case, Drainklear revoked the promise by quoting a new price of
Certainly, Workwell Ltd. may claim that the letter of acceptance have been sent well before the 3 month deadline. Since communications between both parties are made by post, the postal rules apply. Postal rules stated that postal acceptance produces an instantaneous legal effect and a postal offer or revocation is effective only on receipt. Therefore, it is arguable by Workwell Ltd. that according to the postal rules established in the case of
However, court held in Through these decisions, the letter of acceptance by Workwell Ltd. proves to be invalid on the day it was posted as it was wrongly addressed and only reached Drainklear 2 days after Workwell Ltd. received the revocation letter
In But in this situation, since the letter of acceptance is invalid on the day it was posted, it is considered valid only on the day of receipt and by that time, revocation had been taken place (revocation letter arrived Workwell Ltd. 2 days before the acceptance date). Hence, there is no legal binding contract which undoubtedly gives no allowance for Workwell Ltd. to hold Drainklear at its original price.
In conclusion, it is observed that Workwell Ltd. is bound by their bid for the Highroad contract and if Workwell Ltd. decides not to continue with the project for reasons like high cost for instance, Workwell Ltd. is said to be in breach of contract. Workwell Ltd. also may not hold Drainklear to their original price because it is seen that there was no contract and it was not legally binding and that the revocation is allowable before acceptance of contract. Both this situations is likely to give complications to Workwell Ltd. It is suggested that Workwell Ltd. should try and renegotiate the new price quoted by Drainklear so that they could take the job for less than Another alternative would be inviting new tenders and stating terms of which include the total price should be about However, this may not be an easy process. If renegotiations are not successful, then worse comes to worse is that Workwell Ltd. is likely to suffer the loss of If matters are brought to court then Workwell Ltd may end up suffering more than