Corporate governance may be narrowly defined as the relationship of a company with its shareholders or broadly, as its relationship with society. One framework or theory that seeks to provide a rationale for corporate governance is the stakeholder theory. Essentially, this theory The approach adopted by Shell is an example of how this theory is implemented.
Most companies use the stakeholder approach as part of their business strategy to However, it is my opinion that Shell's decision to adopt a stakeholder management strategy is a knee-jerk reaction which arose out of the Brent Spar Shell hoped to It is contended that the decision was purely practical; as a damaged reputation needed to be immediately restored since it may impact future business deals as well as share prices.
One very useful aspect of the framework is that it I believe that this element ensures the framework's overall effectiveness because it not only shows the extent of stakeholder demands satisfied but also provides managers with a valuable management tool that would help set targets and motivate continuous improvement. In addition, it is observed that having KPIs in its stakeholder approach,
There exists a perception that having a stakeholder management framework in place would result in However, it is worth noting that such a framework requires sustained investment over a long period of time. As such, I feel it would be prudent to first This is because financing an expensive framework would ultimately be detrimental to the primary objective of improving the company's profitability. It is also worth noting that there is no clear evidence which proves that adopting such an approach would lead to improved financial performance.
One criticism of the stakeholder theory is that it is only descriptive, i.e. it only explains the complexity of stakeholder issues but does not provide solutions (non-prescriptive). However, I believe that Shell's approach has Therefore, I would contend that Shell's approach has
For further evaluation, it is worth comparing Shell's approach to that of a competitor, such as ExxonMobil. The evaluation of different frameworks affords us a different perspective. Comparatively, it is worth noting that Shell's framework clearly provides a In contrast, the ExxonMobil approach has a much Upon reflection, it is arguable that the For instance, ExxonMobil may be said to face more scrutiny from Americans given that its home base is in the States.
In conclusion, it is my opinion that in light of the above, Shell's approach, while providing clear indicators to measure progress in terms of fulfilling its obligations as a responsible corporate citizen, is still Now that I have finished my assignment, I aim to not just understand the concepts and views of a particular model but to understand its application and usefulness in the real world. Reflecting on the Shell's framework has clearly improved my understanding on the concepts of the stakeholder theory.