The aim of the assignment is to design a stylus instrument to measure the surface profile of work-piece. The stylus instrument is broken down into three parts, mechanical system, sensing elements and output system. Mechanical system defines the setup of stylus, stylus beam and spring, also, skidded system is chosen for the reference datum of the instrument. A LVDT is selected as sensing element, because it has got lots advantages over other displacement sensors. The vertical movements of the stylus is transformed into an electrical signal through the LVDT, the LVDT output is insufficient to be outputted as it is very small and is therefore amplified. In order to eliminate unwanted frequency, a filter is added during data processing. The design is used a gauge mechanism to represent the roughness average of the surface. If a PC is used, then, an A/D converter is connected between the gauge mechanism and the PC, a digital form of roughness average is displayed.
The aim of the assignment is to design a stylus instrument to measure the surface profile of work-piece. Stylus instruments are the best-known and most widely used instrument of the tracer type with electronic amplification of the stylus movement as it is traversed over the test surface. The sharply pointed stylus is rested lightly on the surface of a tested work-piece, as it traverses slowly in a straight line across the surface, the vertical movements of the stylus relative to a reference datum are measured by a sensor, and it converts the information into an electrical signal, processed to give analog or digital representation of the profile.
Surface finish, or texture, consists of the peaks and valleys that make up a surface and their direction on the surface. On analysis, texture can be broken down into three components: roughness, waviness and form. Roughness is irregularities inherent in the production left by the machining agent such as cutting, tearing and surface fatigue, and it is a basic parameter to describe surface characteristics. Currently, centre-line-average, or roughness average, is the parameter most widely specified and measured. In this design, the roughness average is the only parameter to be measured.
The stylus instrument system can be divided into three elements, which are mechanical system, sensing elements and output system. The mechanical system is the pick-up system. The surface deviations traced by the stylus are received by mechanical system.
The sensing element measures the vertical movements of the stylus from mechanical system. And the movements are transformed into electrical signal.
The output of the sensing element is converted into a form more suitable for further processing, and the output system displays the roughness average visually using the most appropriate format.
If an A/D converter and a PC are to be used as a part of the instrument system, which means the output will be a digital form, it will make the system much better, and people can easily to read from the output, even print out the result to do further research. The computer could analysis the signal and automatically correct the output signal from the amplifier and filter. This would allow the user to analysis the surface roughness even more easily. The computer will automatically change the analogue signal into sampled digital output. To do this, an A/D converter with 12-bits is suggested.
The measurement limitations in both horizontal and vertical direction depend on stylus size and geometry. Generally, stylus tips are flat or rounded tip, while rounded tip will provide less limitation in horizontal direction than flat one. In addition, limitation in vertical direction indicates the range of vertical displacement.
To conclude, the general design does fulfill all the specifications set to it. A stylus instrument has been designed which allows the users to measure the roughness average of surface, which is displayed in analogue or digital form. The mechanical system has been analysis and clearly defined, several parameters that affecting the dynamic characteristics of the pick-up system is discussed as well. In this stylus instrument, a LVDT is chosen for a transducer since it has many advantages over other displacement sensors. In one word, the overall system can be described as four parts: sensor, transducer, process data, and output. Sensor collects original information from a surface, transducer transforms it into an electrical signal, then an amplifier and a filter are used to improve the data signal during data processing. After that, output is represented with gauge mechanism or computer. Finally, surface roughness is achieved.