In order to develop an understanding of the standard tensile test, study the mechanical properties of some important engineering materials, obtain values for the yield stress (or proof stress), tensile strength and ductility for those materials and to ascertain the variability of these properties for certain nominally identical specimens, the materials and production assignment associated with the mechanical testing laboratory was set up. In this laboratory, different types of metal specimens were available to test with the Hounsfield Type W Hand Tensometer. And in this assignment, two carbon steels were tested, one was carbon steel AN with 0.1% C, the other one was carbon steel N with 0.8% C. By the tensometer, two copies of force-extension graphs for each of these specimens were obtained, and values of yield stress, tensile strength, ductility could be worked out from the graphs as well. Finally, those data derived from the experiment was compared with a reference data which was done in previous years. Then, the values could be assessed whether it agreed or disagreed with the reference data, and even found out the problems of the experiment.
In this materials and production assignment associated with the mechanical testing laboratory, six types of metal specimens were available to test with the Hounsfield Type W Hand Tensometer. The aim of the experiments was to develop an understanding of the standard tensile test, to study the mechanical properties of some important engineering materials, to obtain values for the yield stress (or proof stress), tensile strength and ductility for those materials and to ascertain the variability of these properties for certain nominally identical specimens. During the test, the specimens were extended in the direction of the applied load and reduce in cross-section in the perpendicular direction, they were ended with fracture. And the tensile curve was obtained, which showing how the important mechanical properties were derived. In the assignment, the objective was to assess whether the values derived from experiments could identify a real variation in the properties of selected carbon steel specimens.
The theory of the analysis of results was stated in section 'The tensile test' of the laboratory briefing sheet in Appendix 1.
And all the equations that would be used were listed as below.
By the Tensometer Type W Testing Machine, six force-extension graphs were obtained, while two of them were attached as reference 1 and reference 2, they were carbon steel AN and carbon steel N, and measurements of these two specimens from the graphs were recorded as below.
P.S. The scale of the force is 2.5KN; the scale of extension is 16:1.
(1). Carbon steel AN, 0.1% C Normalised, 900
(2). Carbon steel N, 0.8% C, Normalised, 830
Analysis the measurements that showed in the last part, values of the yield stress (), tensile strength () and ductility () for each of these two specimens could be worked out.
In terms of Carbon steel AN, applying equation 2.5.
Applying equation 2.6
Applying equation 2.8
Therefore, the upper yield stress was 381.5MPa, the lower yield stress was 366.5MPa, the tensile strength was 525MPa, and the ductility was 0.339. Comparing these data with lab exercise data in the Appendix 1, the first three values were not match with them, and only the ductility was a little bit similar as the Appendix 1. So, the experiment was not quite successful.
In terms of Carbon steel N, applying equation 2.5.
Applying equation 2.6
Applying equation 2.8
Therefore, the yield stress was 441.5MPa, the tensile strength was 962.5MPa, the ductility was 0.111. Comparing these data with the lab exercise data in the Appendix 1, these values were agree with them, and it was quite correspondingly, so it was a correct experiment.
There were a number of sources of error associated with the experiment. Firstly, errors associated with recording of data while puncturing a graph sheet at frequent intervals, because it should be really careful to observe the mercury level. Secondly, errors in identifying significant feature, the material was different even they came from the same factory. Thirdly, errors associated with measurements from the force-extension curve, the elastic line was extremely important for the whole calculation, incorrect identification of the proper elastic line would lead to wrong values not only for yield stress but also for ductility.
From the experiment, it was known that the mechanical properties of carbon steel AN and carbon steel N. After comparing the values that obtained from this experiment with four tables of data that derived from experiments done in previous years. It was found out the mechanical properties of carbon steel AN was incorrect in this experiment, while the mechanical properties of carbon steel N was agree with those reference data, and the values of the yield stress, tensile strength, ductility for it was 441.5MPa, 962.5MPa and 0.111 respectively.