In order to provide a physical insight into the deflection in bending and torsion of statically determinate beams and shafts, a laboratory exercise about measurement of change in deflection and height with two separate test rigs were set up. In this laboratory, one test rig was a simply-supported beam, the other one was a cantilevered hollow shaft. In terms of the first one, a load was put at different positions on the beam and change in deflection at different positions was measured. And with the other one, it was done in two different conditions, one was putting load on a lever arm at 200mm from the shaft centre, and then change in height was measured, the other one just made the load 100mm less from the shaft centre. And the load was increased in steps of 0.2kg, data was recorded as well. Finally, from these tables of data, it was found out the change of deflection and height is proportional to the load, the range between the load point and deflection point had relationship with it as well.
In this bending and torsion laboratory exercise, two separate test rigs were used, one with a simply-supported beam, and the other one with a cantilevered hollow shaft. The aim of the experiment was intended to provide a physical insight into the deflection in bending and torsion of statically determinate beams and shafts. In terms of the simply-supported beam, the load were changed at different positions on the beam and deflection at different positions on the beam were measured. In terms of the cantilevered shaft, load was set at different distance from the shaft centre on a lever arm, and it was decided to choose suitable values of load that would give reasonable deflections in those experiments. So the deflections of those two test rigs could be worked out, furthermore, more details about bending and torsion were achieved.
From the experiment, it was known that the change of deflection and height were proportional to the load. The change of deflection and height was increasing as the load was increasing, and it increased with nearly the same dimension since the load was added up by the same weight each time. Also, the range between the load point and deflection point affected it, and some other variables had relationship with it, such as Young's Modulus, second moment of area of cross-section of beam and polar second moment of area. Therefore, the bending and torsion mainly depend on the load and the position of point that the load acting on them.