In order to develop an understanding of current, voltage, power and power factor in a simple electrical power system, and know well on measurement of torque and mechanical power, the performance of a small three-phase induction motor, we did a laboratory about measurement of induction motor characteristics. In this laboratory, a three-phase induction motor was connected to an electrically-controlled brake and an electrical speed-measuring device, and a control box showed us speed, torque and mechanical power output. At first, the motor was running at rated voltage on no-load, then, we increased the load torque in steps of 0.5Nm and repeated the above measurements until the motor was running at its rated output power of 300W, during this step, we recorded the value of torque, speed, mechanical power, current, power factor and electrical power input, after that, continue to increase the load torque in the same way and take measurements as before, stop it when the motor stalled. In this part, we could achieve a table of data, and calculate the percentage efficiency for each value of load. Therefore, we were able to plot two graphs (Graph 1 and Graph2). And the highest efficiency was about 78% from graph 2, the efficiency would be declined rapidly when the motor was overloaded. Meanwhile, if we clipped the current probe round one of the motor supply leads, and connected it to Ch1 of the oscilloscope, we could get two copies of the transient starting current of the motor from the oscilloscope. From these two copies, we could calculated the peak starting current of the motor, which was 5.8A, and the time taken to reach operating speed on no-load and full load, which was 100ms and 150ms respectively.
In this electrical machines laboratory, we did measurement of induction motor characteristics. The aim of the experiment was to develop an understanding of current, voltage, power and power factor in a simple electrical power system, and familiar with measurement of torque and mechanical power and the performance of a small three-phase induction motor. The three-phase induction motor was the main part of this exercise, it was connected to a test system comprising a dynamometer and a tachometer. The torque on the brake was measured by a cantilever spring fitted with a strain gauge, and there was a control box that collected signals from the cantilever spring and the tachometer. It displayed speed, torque and mechanical power output. In this exercise, by recording these quantities, we could calculate efficiency of this system, and draw graphs of these data. Finally, we would know more details about electrical machines.
Measurements of output power, speed, torque and electrical power were recorded as below.
When the torque reached 5.0Nm, the motor stalled.
The copies of the transient starting current of the motor were gotten from oscilloscope (Graph 1 and Graph 2).
From this experiment, we know that the efficiency of load was really low when using the motor to drive small loads, and the efficiency was low when the motor was overloaded. The highest efficiency was about 78% in this exercise. And the peak starting current of the motor was 5.8A, the time taken to reach operating speed on no-load was 100ms, while it was 150ms for full load.