A design methodology for a gearbox is presented in this report. The input horse power, the input speed and net reductions in the gearbox are the parameters to be specified. A gearbox takes an input shaft rotating and converts it via a gear train into up to three outputs, the process of designing a gearbox is to figure out which ratios are needed and to implement those ratios in the form of positioning various sizes of connected gears. The specification of the gearbox depends on its area of application.
In this report, a gearbox is designed for a commercial meat slicer which has its final shaft rotating at between 80 and 100 rev/min. The input of the meat slicer is a constant speed AC motor running at 1800 rev/min and delivering 1.2 kW. A few points have to be considered on this system, the size of the gearbox is severe restricted, since it has to go onto a work surface where there is severe competition for space. And the motor may be in-line or at right angles to the grinder. Furthermore, the duty is expected to be up to 6 hours per day.
In this design, firstly, the gear ration was decided, and a specimen manual calculation was taken to check bending and surface stress, the result was compared with Gears Program. After that, according to the calculated gear teeth loads, the design of shaft and bearings were discussed. Finally, the designed gearbox was drawn in Solidworks.
Design using the Gears Program. The input was set up to the gears program using the design specification and the manual calculation, like values of power, pinion speed, gear ratio, minimum teeth and duty. Those data put into the Gears Program was similar as the manual calculation I did in the last section, the result is shown in Figure 3.
Since the face width in the manual calculation was assumed as 27 mm, and some other data were modified slightly, the result from the Gears Program was slightly different. Such as pitch circle diameter, outside diameter and root diameter. The face width from the Gears Program was 13 mm, and its limits were between 27 and 39 mm. Therefore, the face width was too low, material quality, module or centre distance had to be decreased to satisfy the face width. Trying different module and material of gears for many times, a satisfied result were obtained. Figure 4 shows the suitable design. The module was decreased to 2, and the material was choosing mild steel instead of cast iron.
The three shafts are assumed to be made of mild steel, carbon steel and alloy steel. The lengths of the shafts are fixed by the face width of the gears and appropriate clearances, the severe constraint of gearbox size is considered as well. The shafts are required to transmit the torque, as well as withstanding the bending stresses due to the gear teeth loads and bearing reactions. There is no axial loading on the shaft because the gears are spur gears.
Assuming the length of the shaft within the gearbox housing is 130 mm. Three shafts had to be analysised, and two sets of bending moment diagrams for horizontal and vertical planes were considered.
In this design, rolling element bearings were chosen for the shaft. Single-row and double-row cylindrical roller bearings were used to support the shafts at the two ends depending on the boundary conditions. The single-row bearings were used at the hinged ends and the double-row ones at the fixed ends.
The Solidworks of the gearbox is attached.