This essay argues that Japanese imperialism was a crucial factor in the history of regional cooperation. Wrenching East Asian nations into modernity via economic development and industrialisation, Japanese imperialism left an indelible imprint on the region which remains to this day. The economic interdependency which emerged prior to the Second World War was subsequently consolidated by the post-bellum foreign policy of the United States in order to promote regional stability. From this, cooperation has developed around a core of economic and production networks. This core of functional interdependency still forms the concrete basis from which regionalism in Pacific Asia is occurring today. Despite a proliferation of potentially divisive issues that have abounded since the turn of the century, economic cooperation provides the impetus for cooperation concerning new and increasingly salient issues which are potentially dangerous conflict ridden. Beginning with locating Japanese imperialism in its historical context, this essay demonstrates that notwithstanding the political and military nature of expansion, the Japanese colonial project had a lasting economic legacy which pervaded the cold-war period and to some extent remains today. In the final sections, attempts to institutionalise regional cooperation and the response of regionalism to challenges that are inherent in East Asian relations today are assessed.
Japanese imperialism was the precursor for economic regionalism based on modernisation and industrialisation in East Asia. With an analysis of the economic legacy of the empire and of contemporary regionalism it is possible to assess how useful regional bilateral and multilateral ties have become and whether the economic basis for a united region remains significant. Regional networks that crystallised during the twentieth century as a result of Japan engaging the region have increasingly become strained by new issues in the era of globalisation. This assertion does not signify the impotency of functional and pragmatic economic interdependence but emphasises the need to accommodate the new and highly salient issues which pervade the epoch.
Beginning with locating Japanese imperialism in its historical context, this essay will aim to demonstrate that despite the political and military nature of expansion, the Japanese colonial project had a lasting economic legacy which pervaded the cold-war period and is still prominent today. In the final sections, attempts to institutionalise regional cooperation and the response of regionalism to challenges that are inherent in East Asian relations today will be assessed.
There are rich and profound historical and political discourses concerning imperialism which help to conceive of it as a particular form of political and economic development rather than simply a militaristic, historical aberration. Moreover, when studying Japanese imperialism in particular - and East Asian relations in general - it is essential to remain aware of the need to ignore the tendency to impose Western-specific theoretical models if they do not apply.
Hilary Conroy sets Japanese imperialism within the context of imperialism as a political phenomenon, referring to the theories of Hobson, Lenin, Schumpeter, Aron, Morgenthau and Waltz, in order to explain how imperialism must be understood as a consequence of the political thought of an era in which the "national interest [was] defined in terms of power". Japanese expansionism is no exception and it too must be explained vis- It was at this time that the Korean peninsula was referred to as a "dagger pointed at the heart of Japan". Japanese imperialism was conceptualised in In a desperate attempt to modernise, or else succumb to the Great Powers, the attainment of territory and wealth was assumed to be an urgent requirement.
At the height of expansion, immersed in the rhetoric of leading Asia into modernity, Japanese elites recognised that in order to realise their goals they 'would need to have at [their] disposal...the greater part of the region's resources'. The intensification of militarist expansion paved the way for conflict with Russia, Britain and the United States. The GEACPS was to have more than just connotations of economic interdependence - it was to be the basis of a political, social and cultural homogeneity extending across East Asia determined by supposedly ethnically superior Japanese elites. Therefore, at the end of 1941 they launched the infamous attack on the United States Navy at Pearl Harbour and nullified the British naval threat in Singapore. At this point, the Japanese empire straddled a vast unchallenged territory, 'from Rangoon to the mid-Pacific, from Timor to the Mongolian steppe'.
Rejecting the official dogma, which heralded notions of cultural, moral, political and economic philanthropy and 'pan-Asian' prosperity, John Dower highlights the racial perspective of Japanese expansionism, which was inspired by modern Western born concepts of social Darwinism combined with apparently Confucian ideals of "proper place". Although the Japanese never achieved a homogenous, identity bound empire, since political conflict against communism raged to the north and clashes of religion and culture were widespread to the south, the barbaric subjugation imposed upon the region served one concrete end - industrialisation and modernisation. If expansion had not been primarily belligerent, war and oppression became regarded as pragmatic measures through which commercial success would breed political might. Wars were 'to be fought over rice, minerals, markets and farming land'. Quite rightly, Donald Calman warns against forgetting that military atrocities and officially sanctioned oppression were 'monstrosities'. The legacy of Japanese expansion is highly salient in the context of the region's international relations.
The Meiji regime implemented some longstanding economic reforms - the fusion of public and private initiatives in 'protected industries', and the creation of vast conglomerates, Fran 'Commercial infrastructure was improved by the construction of railways, roads, telegraph networks, harbours, and warehouses, the standardization of currency and measures, and the availability of credit'. Moreover, Japanese initiatives improved 'agricultural productivity', 'industrial development', and "human resources", in which health, medial and educational provisions were made to raise the economic potential of the colonies. 'Rapid growth was necessary to Japan's quest for economic autarky'. Japan exported industry and economic development to the region in order to consolidate an inward looking autarkic bloc which would feed the metropolis and assert Japan's status as a Great Power. Regional economic development, on the other hand, continued.
It took Washington until 1948 to devise their strategy for consolidating US regional dominion. Occupation and a thorough dissemination of the Japanese war machine followed in order to satisfy the international community. The 'Kennan Restoration' was subsequently designed to restore Japanese 'economic prowess' devoid of a military capability. The Security Treaty signed between the United States and Japan in 1952 signalled the end of Japanese international 'ignominy'. Moreover, alliance with the world's primary power and self-professed protagonist of democracy afforded Japan the 'muscle [that] would inaugurate a new era in which trade issues came to dominate Japan's foreign relations'. As far as the US was concerned during the Cold War, the more powerful Japan and its regional allies could become the better. With this, the US underwrote Japanese security in order that all it resources were geared towards rapid reindustrialisation and market exploitation. 'US policy makers recognized that Japan's Asian colonies had provided 33 per cent of pre-war Japan's raw materials and absorbed 40 per cent of its exports. Restoration of these links...would be critical to a Japanese economic recovery consistent with the US attempt to isolate China'. This set the tone of economic relations in the region up to the 1970s.
In terms of the economic integration of East Asia during the twentieth century, 'Japan...provided both the engine...and [the] influential model of economic development for the region as a whole'. Japanese imperialism forcefully imposed a particular model on the region which resulted in 'consolidating the role of the state in domestic economic development'. Moreover, the propping up of the regional economy, designed to support the growth of Japanese commerce, was symptomatic of the dispersion of Japanese corporations across East Asia. Industrialisation spread as these businesses sought newer and cheaper locations for production. Japan's successful fusion of politics and economics was such that 'aid and infrastructure packages...effectively lock[ed] host governments into symbiotic relationships with Japanese capital'. The "Asian Way" became synonymous with rapid modernisation and 'accelerated industrial development'. For Western liberal economies a certain disdain for this economic model invoked initiatives to prize the region open. This model has come under increasing pressure but it still remains a vitally important factor in terms of regionalism.
Even when the US was forced to reconsider the massive post-war military deployment in the area in the 1970s they remained committed to the stability of the region based on the economic vibrancy Japanese activity had brought. With the emergence of China - consequential of Sino-Soviet conflict - and the boom experienced in the Newly Industrialised Economies (NIEs) regional economic relationships, particularly with Japan, coaxed the communist giant into the global market and warmed relations with the West. The so-called "Nixon Shocks" were designed to realign the regional agenda as Cold War tensions subsided and the need for a military presence eased. The focus of this policy was to reign in Japanese economic development which was occurring at a phenomenal and unchallenged rate.
The Japanese reaction to such challenges has always been distinguished by an effective tweaking, rather than a wholesale reappraisal, of the regional economic system. Consequently, in the mid-1990s, East Asian regionalism was 'buzzing with a competitive energy' that had marked Japan's own economic development throughout the second half of the twentieth century. Clearly, there have been periods of change and fluctuation - in the Japanese domestic economy, the regional economy and the international economy - but this form of economic interdependence has characterised the region for almost a century.
Rather than simply relying on export oriented production, the Japanese encouraged a great boost in foreign direct investment in order to produce overseas and therefore reduce costs and regain profitability. Investment in the region was a consequence of a concerted strategy by Japanese manufacturers, 'to achieve economies of scale, scope, and networking by capitalising on the regions deepening division of labour'. The impetus for this action was to create "a single market from which to pursue a global corporate strategy". For Japan, not only does it [help] escape the potentially crushing impact of the high yen, but it reduces the size of the trade surplus directly attributable to Japan, and thus reduces some of the international pressure the nation would otherwise face'. For the rest of the region, it provides an element of stability in the face of a prying international community. As Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI) stated, "the globalization of economic activity has made it impossible to push ahead with economic development within the limited framework of a country defined by strict national boundaries".
However, since the mid-1990s there had been a transition in Pacific Asia regionalism. Two distinct periods are now apparent: first, 'from about 1985 to 1994...the period of the flying geese model and of "open regionalism", or APEC style consensual cooperation among governments'; and, second, 'a period of instability in economic hierarchies and economic relations' since around 1994 which has been characterised, in simple terms, by a divergent contest between the 'Japan-centred' and 'greater China' centred regional production networks. This 'served as a convenient framework to coordinate some aspects of economic policy and to lower transaction costs faced by Japanese corporations (as investors) and Japanese financial institutions operating in other Asian economies. Thus, the fit was perfect with the notion of Japan acting as "lead goose", maintaining its own economic model intact, while gradually incorporating what were (mistakenly) perceived as junior versions of its model into an Asian community'. Whilst Japan continued to bankroll and provide the technology for regional development and prosperity, East Asian governments realised the benefits of loose political cooperation in order to achieve economic goals. Thus, 'APECs consensual and nonbinding pattern of policy cooperation suited perfectly'.
After 1994, however, 'the flying goose pattern [had] disintegrated, and the countries in East Asia were left to search for other models and definitions of their self-interest'. The greater China economic network, including Taiwan and Hong Kong, was gradually beginning to outstrip Japan's 'technological and competitive superiority'. This period, therefore, experienced what can be seen as the erosion of the principles upon which the previous conception of regionalism, the "flying geese" model, had been founded. APEC proved impotent in the face of this increased complexity.
In light of the changing nature of regionalism, Richard Higgot and Richard Stubbs juxtapose the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum with the East Asia Economic Caucus (EAEC) which highlights diverging trends that remain poignant in the twenty first century. APEC, as an open forum devoted to economic liberalisation, came under challenge from the EAEC, a more narrowly defined bloc based on concepts of the 'Asian Way'. APEC formed in 1989 amid a proliferation of initiatives designed to institutionalise regional economic cooperation. Theoretically, it was underpinned by liberal institutionalist notions of relative gain driven international cooperation - APEC was, therefore, seen as a means to pull the region together and assimilate it with the international political economy. Prior to 1997, APEC was built on the optimism of the remarkable economic achievements experienced in the region - for the international community, and America in particular, it was necessary to break open these economies in order to remain competitive. Hence, APEC was riddled with a political agenda, namely the 'spread...the neo-liberal economic creed'.
Despite this, within Pacific Asia, APEC was regarded as essential in order to consolidate regionalism. APEC has failed to either achieve the goals it was designed to achieve or to affect the behaviour and identity of the actors involved. The general consensus among scholars appears to be that APEC has thus far failed to instil any profound adherence to the tenets of economic liberalism - economic, financial and technical cooperation initiatives remain mundane. However, the process is considered a prerequisite to 'deeper integration' which has as yet failed to materialise.
The EAEC emerged in distinct opposition to APEC as the anti-thesis of a perceived capitulation to Western economic dogma and globalisation. Furthermore, it was intended to reflect the 'political, historical and cultural dimensions' of the region in contrast to American and European regionalism. It was assumed to be "an independent Asian voice". Under pinned by the investment capabilities of Japanese corporations, and, increasingly, Chinese ones, the region had experienced a surge in economic interdependence based on tightly knit production networks. The twentieth century experience in the region, with Japanese imperialism and US Cold War hegemony, marked out an ever more distinguishable politico-economic identity. For many, the time was ripe for an inward looking consolidation of this regionalism to promote social and cultural Asian-ness. However, the EAEC never gained any ground. Governments in the West opposed it and put pressure on its allies in the region, especially Japan, to reject the proposal. The EAEC would have negated the advantages the regions economies reaped from global trade, alienating the US in particular, and would have relied too heavily on Japanese finance - the latter provoked uneasy sentiments given Japan's history in the region. The EAEC was eventually swallowed up by APEC. However, East Asia represents a security interest for America, so in that sense, Japan has not written off the potential of closer regional cooperation. Also, the rest of the region, imbued with a sense of antagonism towards the West since 1997, has not abandoned closer cooperation.
Economic integration still fuels the regionalism process even though its formal institutionalism has remained a benign phenomenon. Continuing the process that began with Japanese imperialism - and was actively pursued under US hegemony during the Cold War - cross border networks still form the basis of regional interdependence. In particular, Japanese corporations provide 'goods and investment' which is warmly received across the region provided that it 'contribute[s] to national prosperity and the Japanese government does not use its economic leverage to impose specific policies'. In this sense, the ambiguity of APEC, which has led to its "standstill", serves the interests of its largest two members - the US and Japan - by promoting the status quo. For Japan, the inherent flexibility of APEC means that it can bend the rules and protect vital interests while putting pressure on other countries not to discriminate against its products. For the US, any symbol of economic liberalism is useful, whilst an ineffective institution allows them to go beyond the APEC forum and apply pressure to individual countries in bilateral negotiations. The lack of formal institutionalism in the region does not imply that the regionalism agenda is in jeopardy. The proliferation of 'transboundary' economic and security issues as the process of globalisation abounds means that there is an increasing necessity for the countries of the region to cooperate in order to maintain national interests. To date, 'ad hoc, piecemeal negotiations' have characterised the system of 'open regionalism' and 'unilateral liberalization'.
In light of this, the successful longevity of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), as 'one of the most...enduring regional associations of the contemporary period', holds some potential. Philip Charier believes that ASEAN formed, not just as a result of historical interactions, but as a result of a common socially constructed spatial awareness in relation to "outsiders". Economic cooperation and interdependence is seen as vital by both parties in order to maintain political stability. Despite its apparent significance, bilateral trade links with individual countries prevailed as did reliance on external powers to resolve conflicts as a consequence of the adherence to mutual non-intervention norms within ASEAN which had been enshrined in the Bangkok Declaration of 1967.
The 1997 Financial Crisis, which was exacerbated by environmental concerns, such as the "haze", and political conflict in Cambodia occurring almost concomitantly, served to highlight the impotency of ASEAN in practical matters. Although only the latter fell directly under the aegis of the ASEAN framework, the inability to provide regional solutions to these problems was regarded as a failure on ASEAN's part. The impact of these crises on the North East Asian economies imbued the entire region with a sense of commonality which made the ASEAN Plus Three (APT) initiative all the more welcomed. The realisation of the dependency on external actors in particular invoked a sense of vulnerability. ASEAN, as the longest standing regional association, was seen as a useful body through which solutions could be reached'. Rather than succumb to this inherent impotency, ASEAN proved that it was not a 'static' organisation and could 'grow beyond its limitations'. Moreover, cooperation has moved beyond government issues to embrace a 'broad range of commercial and social bodies'.
APT signals a recognition that 'the global norms that upheld the non-intervention principle have changed dramatically in the last few years', and that conflict resolution may necessitate 'preventative' aspects, not just post-crisis management. That said, 'Asia should not be complacent...[and] should not delude itself into thinking that its identity can develop solely in regional terms'. Previous attempts have met with crisis throughout the history of the region. The region - however defined - must not attempt to shut out the rest of the world in a 'reactive' and closed response to issues of globalisation. Rather, regionalism should pursue an embracing response in order to harness the forces of the contemporary world to the benefit of the region. To do so, closer cooperation and collective bargaining will be the linchpin of the Asian voice in the international community. If this convergence remains then a common cultural and social identity may well crystallise.
Consequently, the APT initiative has become, 'the most ambitious and comprehensive of the governmental efforts to create an institutional framework to support East Asian regionalism'. There is a considerable disparity between North East Asian and South East Asian states, both in the practical sense of economic expertise and in the social and cultural sense. This lack of commonality is exacerbated by political issues. For instance, there is no interest from any individual government, or desire among the collective for any single state, to take the lead in advancing regionalism given the nature of previous attempts to do so. The role of the US is also crucial - it is unlikely to favour any closed form of regionalism which takes the strategic economic and security agenda out of its hands. Epistemic communities and policy networks, as detailed by Paul Evans based on influential works by John Gerard Ruggie and Richard Higgott, can evolve through the interaction of previously disparate individuals and groups that consequently forge a common sense of purpose and identity which provides not just optimism for, but a distinct basis from which to advance, regionalism.
APT regionalism does not imply closed regionalism based on previous concepts of an East Asian identity which failed in the past. Contrary to Markus Hund's assessment of APT as unrepresentative of East Asian identity, the argument here is that regional perceptions have changed which are now more conducive to an open form of regionalism as best represented by the APT association. Regional perceptions have changed as a result of globalisation, and in particular, the 1997 Financial Crisis. Clearly at this stage doubts about the commitment of members, particularly the northern three, are an issue as it remains to be seen whether APT will bring about 'significant...achievements'. Clearly, only time will tell if it is successful or not. Hund himself acknowledges that, 'regardless of APT's internal divisions and uncertainties, its dynamic has nevertheless already had an impact on the political and economic landscape of East Asia'. The point that 'the evolution of an exclusive East Asian identity seems to be a long way off' is a mute one. In this sense, traditional power relations might well evolve differently in East Asia than they did for example in Europe, if at all. If this is the case then the rise of a powerful China will be more beneficial than confrontational.
In summary, Japanese imperialism must be seen as a crucial factor in the history of regional cooperation. Wrenching East Asian nations into modernity, via economic development and industrialisation, Japanese imperialism left an indelible imprint on the region. The economic interdependency which emerged prior to the Second World War was subsequently consolidated by the post-bellum foreign policy of the United States in order to promote regional stability. From this, cooperation has developed around a core of economic and production networks. This core of functional interdependency still forms the concrete basis from which regionalism in Pacific Asia is occurring today. This essay has attempted to demonstrate that despite a proliferation of potentially divisive issues that have abounded since the turn of the century, economic cooperation provides the impetus for cooperation concerning new and increasingly salient issues which are potentially conflict ridden.