Hedley Bull's state-centric theory of international politics offers an insight into how change can occur in international relations. The tension between order and justice represented in his work marks a sophisticated interpretation of one of the perennial conundrums that belies international politics. Bull conceived of order as the best way to ensure basic justice, that is the minimal justice required to protect the core values of social existence. He chose neither the extremes of realism nor revolutionism that subordinated justice for order or The Bull constructed a theory that maintained that, within an international system in which anarchy pertained, order among states was vital and best served by the system of international society. It is in this way, by presenting order and justice in tension - a result of the pluralist and solidarist elements of his theory - that Bull opens the door for critical theory. Bull defended international society as the ultimate political organisation in a state system governed by anarchy and simultaneously criticised its limitations, providing a critical edge to his state centric theory.
Hedley Bull's state-centric theory of international politics offers an insight into how change can occur in international relations. The tension between order and justice represented in his work marks a sophisticated interpretation of one of the perennial conundrums that belies international politics. Bull conceived of order as the best way to ensure basic justice, that is the minimal justice required to protect the core values of social existence. In rejecting the Hobbesian order-over-justice rationale and the Kantian justice-over-order hypothesis, Bull constructed a theory which maintained that, within an international system in which anarchy pertained, order among states was vital and best served by the system of international society. He recognised 'international order as the ultimate foundation for the protection of human values'.
With his shrewdly aware sense of the historical determinants of international politics Bull was 'especially sensitive to alterations in the historical conditions bearing upon analysis and interpretation'.
Bull defended international society as the ultimate political organisation in a state system governed by anarchy and simultaneously criticised its limitations, providing a critical edge to his state centric theory. His 'outlook tends to be agnostic on structural matters, appreciating the positive and negative aspects of the state as the basis for...participation in global politics'. He concluded that although this was possible and desirable in theory, the conditions did not exist to make it practicable.
Bull's work was rooted in what he called the classical approach to International Relations, influenced by the methodologies of philosophy, history and law. 'Its central feature is an explicit reliance on the exercise of judgement'.
Order, in Bull's construct, is 'in the common interests of all states in achieving the elementary goals of social life - the security of life against violence, the sanctity of promises, and the stability of possessions'. Thus, one of the essential institutions of order in Bull's theory is international law. It helped provide order by 'identifying the constitutive principle of the society of states, setting the basic rules for coexistence, and providing a language for their formal relations'. This was possible in the
The rationalist assumption is that 'given the inevitability of relations with other units, a common desire for order is the minimum necessary condition to begin the evolution of international society'. This is the '
In the pluralist conception of international society, only common rules and a respect for law bind atomistic states. In the solidarist conception, international society exists beyond simple respect for the rule of law. Moral and ethical consensus develops through frequent interaction and provides the basis for subsequent relations, which creates a more cohesive system.
Consequently, Bull's theory reflects 'three paradigms of world politics: realism, pluralism and solidarism' and tackles the 'themes of...power, order and justice'. It is best portrayed by his treatment of international law and the fact that despite the conflict between interests and rules, states more often than not conform to legal norms.
The pluralist in Bull recognised, in Andrew Linklater's words, that "states are able to agree on the need for order despite their competing views of justice". However, 'the traditional devices of the maintenance of interstate order' reigned in such solidarist elements.
Given that 'pluralists privilege order over justice in the belief that there is not sufficient solidarity among mankind to provide for the latter' Bull was driven to investigate the possibility of an 'ethics of coexistence'. He said that, "the cosmopolitan society which is implied and presupposed in our talk of human rights exists only as an ideal, we court great dangers if we allow ourselves to proceed as if it were a political and social framework already in place".
Therefore, those who argue that international society is the ultimate form of world political organisation champion its pluralist physiognomy, which enables "an association of independent and diverse political communities, each devoted to its own ends and its own conception of the good". There is much to be made of the argument that the realisation of international society is "second best" to a potential world government of some kind. Arguably, Kant was a major proponent of this idea of "second best", although proffering an international-society-type thesis he remarked in his 'Definitive Articles of Perpetual Peace' that due to the structure of the states system 'the positive idea of a
However, there is the idea that consensus must develop from this practical association of states so that a lasting, orderly In his Inconsistent and unreliable public pressure to 'alleviate chronic human suffering' for example reveals sentiments of "us" and "them" which failed to stimulate sufficient desire to intervene in Rwanda in 1994, for example, a stark reminder of 'the paucity of cosmopolitan moral awareness'. Bull was anxious to remain cautious over the implications which demands for justice - 'in a world where there was no shared understanding of what justice entails' - might have on international order. This concern rang true in his
Too often, Bull couched his appeals for justice in the language of preserving order - possibly an attempt to make his demands more tasteful to the great powers, certainly a result of his latent pluralism. In this sense, 'the pluralism required for an international society to work is bounded'.
Within the international system approach to International Relations theory, in structural realism for example, order (manifest particularly as the balance of power) is 'systemic in origin', therefore not 'the product of the intention and wishes of diplomats'. However, this conception of order excludes 'any kind of normative component'. Rather, theorists of international society are attempting to account for considerations of human justice within the states system that is inhospitable to notions of global community.
However, he later became fascinated by the status of 'Third World' powers within the states system and often broke out of the pluralist-international-society mould to suggest that the rights of individuals were prior to the rights of states. In order to protect this fact the system of states would require a measure of consensus. He inevitably retreated back to his original position, though somewhat richer with the consideration of certain universalist principles.
The clash of order and justice in Bull's work is crucial to understanding how he prescribed for the possibility of change in international politics. Maintaining order via the society of states was viewed as the ultimate provision of basic justice for individuals.
This also led Bull to reject universalism as utopian because of the expediency required by states and statesmen to maintain order and the foundations of minimal coexistence, which meant that 'justice and order cannot always be reconciled'. What Bull emphasised was 'cultural change which produces a different perception of common interests in a context of coexistence and co-operation'. "The rights and benefits to which justice has to be done in the international community are not simply those of states and nations, but those of individual people throughout the world as a whole". Bull believed that the states system, as international society, was not inherently averse to such principles.
This tension in his work 'gave it its density' and made it particularly 'instructive and thought provoking'. The major issues of international political life could only be understood in the context in which humanity has come to interpret them. 'By reference to the works of political philosophers who have discussed and sharpened them'; in spatial and chronological context; and, in the context of the rules and laws that shape social existence. States were not egoistic actors seeking to maximise interest gains but political entities that reflected the beliefs of a society seeking consensus and coexistence. The state, therefore, could only be a concept that reflected this subjectivity of human existence, not an objectively value-free abstraction.
Bull rejected realism for it was, as he saw it, ignorant of normative principles and principles of justice, and he rejected the world community approach on the grounds that it unrealistically subordinated goals of order to goals of justice. Bull suggested that a society of states emerges out of a consciousness among states of both enlightened self-interest and moral obligation'.
Therefore, international order was maintained by respect for these rules of coexistence. In Bull's own words, "the pluralist doctrine that so far from constructing a disguised form of Realpolitik... presents a set of prescriptions more conducive to the workings of international order than those of Grotius... It is a conception of international society founded on the observation of the actual area of agreement between states and informed by a sense of the limitations within which in this situation rules may usefully be made rules of law".
This classic tension begs the question that constantly plagued Bull: 'What value has international order if states do not provide for plural conceptions of the good life?" The answer lay in an intuitive judgement in which 'it is necessary to take into account the degree of injustice embodied in the existing order'. 'International order had to be evaluated in terms of the goal of world order, and the protection of the core goal of social life - individual security from violence - it afforded'. 'Bull suggested that the moral value of the society of states has to be judged in terms of what it contributes to individual justice; the implication being that if the society of states fails to protect individual justice, this would place in jeopardy its normative value'.
In one of Bull's 'rare' flashes of moral assertiveness he emphasised that individual justice was 'more fundamental' than international order or international justice. It was 'because its units are ultimately individuals and not any artificial construction...the purposes of...which should inform the activities of states and the theoreticians and practitioners of order among them'. Hence, 'his style of argument with regard to the balance of power was more to render it as the best arrangement that states had been able to make in the circumstances then to celebrate it as a high achievement of Western civilisation'.
In Although he argued that international society and prescriptions of order were often contradictory to 'notions of justice', including even the limited concept of international justice, it was not inherently 'inhospitable'.
These were not beyond the realm of possibility within the concept of international society. The 'On every page...it is possible to find a foundation on which further work could build'.
Bull's work in particular reflects such elements. The tensions in his work, between pluralism and solidarism, between realism and revolutionism and between order and justice are ultimately caused by a profound, historical and philosophical conception of international politics that comprehends the necessity to explain the present in order to conceive of change. As such, every eventuality must be explored against the challenge of uncompromising, ahistorical positivism, for 'it is better to recognise that we are in darkness than to pretend that we can see the light'.