This article attempts to analyze the relevance of concept of 'Developmental States' and 'Competition States' in the East Asian States. It firstly defines the meanings of these two concepts. Then it investigates the role of state in East Asia State in the early stage of development and shows that they are the 'Developmental States'. And it notes that 'Developmental State' are being transformed in the globalizing world by investigating the international and domestic effect. It therefore concludes that the transformation from the developmental state to competition state is the best description and the change is diverse in different countries due to their different economic structures. In addition, it gives some limitation of the competition state concept.
Between 1960s and 1980s, East Asia was the most fast-growing region in the worlds. To explain the growth in this region, the concept of developmental states which emphasizes on the importance of role of states is popularly used. In 1993, World Bank used this explanation to appreciate East Asian Miracle. In 1997, the World Bank changed to criticize the outdated state intervention of East Asia. In fact, the international organization changed their attitude, because the state is being changed by globalization.
There are hot debates in contemporary IPE concerning the role of states in the globalizing world, and the states in East Asia are the popular case study. In this debate, there are two schools of thought: Hyperglobalizers and the Skeptics. The former (such as Strange) finds that the growths of global production and markets cause the retreat of state. And the latter school (such as Cameron, Garret, Swank, Rodrik & Weiss) argues that the state increases its intervention (such as social insurance) to offset the increase of the risk in the globalizing world.
But the former and latter overemphasizes the international force and domestic force respectively. The former ignores the historical background of state including the state-society relations; while the latter neglects the nature of structure and the contribution of the globalization. Therefore, to study the effect of globalization, we should deploy both International Political Economy (IPE) and Comparative Political Economy (CPE) into analysis.
This paper uses the transformationalist school of thought (concept of competition state invented by Cerny) to find the way of state transformation and prevent the prejudice on either decrease or increase of state intervention. But before describing the transformation, the paper defines the concept of developmental state and competition state. Then it shows the way and reason of the transformation of role of state by using IPE and CPE framework and applies into three countries (Singapore, Korea and Japan). Finally, it concludes that the competition state is the best concept to describe current situation in East Asia but it still has some limitations.
Schotle said, 'We live in globalizing rather than completely globalized condition'. After the fast economic development, the three above countries found that the heavy state intervention is needed to decrease: Singapore found the problem of state-owned enterprise after the economic recession in 1980s; Korea and Japan leaders used the way of de-regulation to solve its problematic economic structure after the Asian Financial crisis and Bubble Economy respectively. But the neo-liberal reform has not completed yet in these states. As shown in Japan, the MOF still do not give the regulatory power to the independent organization FSA, but the other neo-liberal project such as privatization is necessarily progressing because of the outdated state intervention. In Singapore, the flexible wage system keep improving, the state gave more flexible to the private sector to decide the wage from 1986 to 1999, although state still controlled 70% of wage. But the concept of competition state can be seen as a destination of the East Asian State.
From the three cases, we can find that the speeds of the neo-liberal reform are different in every state. The privatization and flexible wage system in Singapore and deregulation in Korea went smoother than the deregulation in Japan. As explained by Cerny, because of the different economic structure, the three countries carried out the convergent political globalization in the path-dependent way. Due to the great influence of foreign investor in Singapore and International Organization (IMF) in Korea, the reform carried out more quickly in order to make the market friendly environment. On the other hand, because of long history of protectionist, the conservative domestic politics, and the incident such as Asian financial crisis, the reform in Japan was carried out more carefully to prevent hurting the domestic's interest. From this, we can see that the merit of combining the IPE (international factor) and CPE (state and society relation). This gives us a full picture of political globalization of different states in the world and shows the divergent and convergent of the process.
In addition, the privatization in Singapore and the deregulation in Korea and Japan can show Cerny's transformation approach: shift from the macro-interventionism to micro-interventionism. In the case of Korea, the financial institution gave the subsidies based on the performance rather than protection (adopted in the past) which can show shift from intervention based on comparative advantage to intervention based on competitive advantage.
But the East Asian state can not show the shift from welfare state to competition state, since there is no any significant change in social expenditure in these states. In fact, the developmental state was not a welfare state. Since the states including three above cases feared the spread of communism after providing the egalitarian environment during the cold period, they tried to reduce the welfare burden in the early development. For example, Japan is described as 'Liberal Welfare states' which relied more on the family and the community on the welfare starting from early 1970s. So the shift claimed by Cerny is not applicable in East Asia. He invoked the competition state concept, because he wanted to demonstrate the decrease of welfare in Nordic countries. He did not expect that the Nordic countries are different from developmental states in the provision of welfare.
The concept has some limitations too. As discussed before, Cerny admitted that there are some paradox of competition state which means that the political globalization 'does not lead to a simple decline of the state but may be seen to have some expansion of state intervention and regulation in the name of competitiveness and marketization." He thinks that state would use its visible hand (such as social welfare) occasionally to offset the increase of social risk caused by the globalization. In the case of Korea, the state gave financial support to the high technology industry in short term to recover the economy after the crisis. But Cerny is optimistic for the maintenance of competition state, because his main assumption is the dominance of Neo-liberal idea in the world. In fact, not every part of the world is dominated by Neo-liberal idea. For example, the Islamic World has strong economic nationalism ideology which opposed this idea. But most of the East Asian States do not have strong reason to completely deny neo-liberal idea now, because their economies still perform well under this ideology.
The concept of competition state is applicable to the East Asian State generally. Because of the geographical proximity and close economic relationship, other East Asian countries also face the similar kind of crisis such as Asian financial Crisis and the intense competition within the region. They are also being transformed to competition state from developmental state. Similarly with Korea, several Asian countries such as Malaysia, Indonesia and Thailand were demanded to move away from 'Crony capitalism' by IMF. Taiwan decreased the subsidies to strategic industry because of preparation of joining WTO. China's state-own enterprises were closed down after the open policy. Non-developmental state, Hong Kong, also carried out the privatization to solve the problem of budget deficit.
From this paper, we can see that the globalization is not simply about the retreat or enhancement of state. As described by World Bank, East Asia states are flexible to change to maintain its competitiveness. But if they find that the drastic reform pose threat to its economy, they will use the intervention to offset the risk.