The successful stories of different East Asian states are tended to be group together to form East Asian Development Models or theories by some scholar. Therefore the paper attempts to determine the relevance of these theories to the developmental experiences in two of East Asian States -- Hong Kong (HK) and Singapore
Firstly, it explains the components of the theories of developmental states and finds the core elements of this theory.
Then it tries to compare the feature of role of state in these two states instead of comparing the degree of state intervention. It describes how Hong Kong and Singapore government develop their economy under their faith in less intervention and government involvement respectively. It will be explained by using the theories
This paper finally concludes that the theories can explain Hong Kong and Singapore's successful stories even though it has some mistake.
The economic developments of East Asian States were successful after 1950s. From 1965 to 1990, the average growth of GNP per capita in these states increased about five percent which is more than the amount in Latin America (about two percent).Some of the states including Korea, Japan, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore can approach and enter into the high - income economies in the world.
Since these states have been growing in economy together, many scholars try to find the common feature of their successful experience in development and then develop as theories or models. This paper tries to find the theories of East Asian developmental state from different literatures. And then it focuses on the role of states theories, and finds the core elements of these theories.
Many people always try to compare the successful stories in two of the East Asian States - Hong Kong and Singapore, since they are both small economies and have similar background. Therefore, this paper attempts to use the theories to explain their successful stories and determine whether the theories are relevance to their stories.
The successful stories of East Asian states can be explained by several ways including geography, history, culture and role of states. For the geography explanation, these states are proximity to the sea which can encourage the trade and investment with the outside world.
If we take history into an account in the effect of the economic development, we can see that the cold war gave East Asia a chance to develop. During the cold war, the world was divided into two parts - Capitalist bloc (led by United States) and Socialist bloc (led by Soviet Union). In fact, the Asia-Pacific region had three socialist states including Soviet Union, China and North Korea in the 1950s .In order to prevent the spread of communism in East Asia, US gave the military and foreign aids (such as Japan), the chance of access to the world market (such as Singapore) to the East Asian States. In the cultural explanation, the hard-working of East Asian and close business relationship of the East Asian are helpful for its economic development. But if the geography, history and culture are the only explanations, other economies would have little to learn from successful stories of East Asia. So the theory or model of East Asian States can not be formed in this situation. But this is not the case from the experience of East Asian Development, since the role of government is also influential factor. Therefore, to find the theories of developmental states, the paper focuses on the economic policy formulated by the East Asian State.
The Economic developments in Hong Kong and Singapore are so successful. Between 1950 and 1999, the GDP per capita in HK increased from $2218 (in Geary-Khamis dollars) to $20352 in 1999, while Singapore increased from $2219 to $23582. So we can see that the explanations of their successful development are valuable to study.
As mentioned before, the successful stories can be explained by geography, history and culture. In the case of HK and Singapore, these factors can also explain the successl. In the geographical explanation, both countries have ready access to the sea, so they can easily get trade relationship with outside world. In the historical explanation, the Cold war gave them a chance to become strategic important location. They became the entrepot base. In 1951, at the peak of the Korean War, Hong Kong's trade was about three times that of its gross domestic product. In the cultural explanations, both populations are predominately Chinese: comprising 98.5% in Hong Kong and 74.4 % in Singapore The developmental theories can be developed by the explanation of role of state in these two countries, since the countries can improve their state policy after learning this explanation. Thus, the paper focuses on the role of state in HK and Singapore.
The theories of developmental state (including embedded autonomy, and shared growth, market-friendly and flexible policy) are relevant to explain the successful stories in Hong Kong and Singapore. The embedded autonomy in HK and Singapore can explain that these states can prevent rent-seeking activities. The theories of shared growth, market-friendly and flexible policy can explain that Hong Kong government intervened in the housing and stock market under the faith in "positive non-intervention". And the theories of market-friendly and flexible policy can describe that Singapore government reduced the state intervention under its faith in the government involvement.
But the theories still have some problem. Some of the components in the market friendly strategy (including ensure adequate investment in people, provision of a competitive climate for enterprise and openness of international trade and stable macroeconomic management) are too vague. The stable macroeconomic management is a way of the provision of a competitive for enterprise. In fact, the provision of a competitive climate for enterprise can be interpreted in many ways. Although the market friendly strategy fairly explains the HK and Singapore, it can't explain Japan which is still not openness of international trade. If the study is expanded into more than two countries, the theories will get the same problem with the neo-classical or statist view which can't reflect the reality. But, overall, the theories are relevance to Hong Kong and Singapore's situation.
Different countries have different historical background. According to Path dependency theory, outcome of a process depends on its past history .So it is difficult to greatly change Hong Kong and Singapore in the faith in less intervention and government involvement respectively because of their historical background. But their economies are still successful, since the degree of intervention is not a key factor to affect the economy. The more important thing is how the state intervenes. From the Singapore experience, the government intervened in market oriented way. And then they adjusted and reduced the government intervention according to the situation. The other developing countries which wanted to follow the model of Singapore or Hong Kong should consider their background. When they follow a certain degree of intervention, they should be flexible to adjust it.
To conclude, the successful stories in East Asia are worthy studying. But when other countries want to copy from them, they should consider their own situation first.