CFS Insurance was formed in late 1890s, since then the company have expanded its range of services to remain competitive in market and providing better service to its customers. The operation Director has proposed re-structuring of company's operations department to provide better customer service and building close working relationship with High Street Agents. The purpose of this document is to present to the Board of Directors the broad plans for the implementation of the changes expressed by the Director. The document details the project plan, the approach for the re-structuring and evaluating the risks involved.
The stake/interest of the stakeholders depends largely upon their involvement in the project life cycle and the impact it would make on their current working style.
Stakeholder management refers to managing communication to satisfy the needs of, and resolve issues with, project stakeholders. Actively managing stakeholders increase the likelihood that project will not veer off track due to unresolved stakeholder issues. Different stakeholders will be managed in different ways depending upon their interest and impact over the project.
Consultation and Negotiation on various issues with employees and trade unions through face-to-face meetings. When face-to-face meetings are not warranted or practical, telephone calls, electronic mails and other electronic tools will be used for exchanging information and dialoguing.
Regular project review meetings so that key stakeholders assessment are an integral part of the project. This involves the Operations team and Operation Director, who will be meeting regularly in order to attain success.
Maintaining close contact with the key stakeholders such as trade unions, employees to improve chance of determining stakeholder perception of the project.
Providing on going, up-to-date status report to the Managing Director for use in developing and implementing of strategy.
Ensure an explicit evaluation of probable stakeholders response to major project decision.
Hotline numbers where stakeholder could call and ask queries relating to the project.
To remain competitive, profitable and reduce operational cost by re-structuring the company's operational department through creating multi-purpose teams; increasing flexibility among employees and providing Internet links to high streets agents to build closer working relationship.
Risk Management is a process of the identification, measurement, and control and financing of risks, which threaten the existence, the reputation, assets or the personnel of an organisation or the services, it provides.
Risk 1: Mitigate and Share
Outsourcing the software development activity of the project could reduce the risk. Good management skills would be needed to manage the control. If risk appears in the future it could be shared between both the companies hence reducing the overall impact on the company.
Risk 2: Mitigate and Share
The probability of risk could be reduced by putting extra time and cost in providing extensive training to the staff members to handle various types of insurances also taking into consideration their concerns. External trainers could be recruited if required to provide excellent training to employees after pilot phase evaluation.
Risk 3: Mitigate and Allow
Reduce the risk by having strong firewall and anti-virus software's meant to keep the data safe from outside interference.
Risk 4: Mitigate and Allow
Consulting them and negotiating on issues concerning them could mitigate the risk of trade unions having unhealthy attitude toward re-structuring. The process has been discussed in details under the project implementation strategy.
Risk 5: Mitigate and Allow
Putting extra time and effort in involving employees through out the complete process in order to motivate and gain commitment could reduce the risk. Establish hotlines to counter the spread of rumors. Make presentations; hold enterprise wide meetings and ensuring that top managing is accessible to quickly address concerns.
The project planning starts with division of project into activities, followed by estimation of their duration. Network analysis method seems more beneficial as compared to Gantt chart as it offers extensive information about time control and it also adds logic and analysis capabilities, which Gantt chart lacks.
Control project and planning is exercised at more than one level:
The first decision for financial planning and control is to establish what parameters will be planned and monitored.
Parameters for financial Planning and Control:
1. Cost: Taking cost as main parameter also makes it possible to make sensible comparison between cost incurrent and earned value.
2. Earned Value: The value of work completed will allow useful analysis in comparison with the cost. The earned value can be measured at any time with the Gantt chart where the progress of each activity is recorded for information and evaluation purpose.
Commitment: This refers to commitment taken in the project that would entail the project in future cost.
After carefully considering all the aspects of the projects, it is certain that the project could bring tremendous change in company's success by reducing various costs and increasing company's profits. The project is expected to span over period of 12 months. May be presently the employees are not very keen on this transformation but the team strongly believe with good management and involvement it would be able to gain all the confidence of the employees.
Project risk management includes the processes concerned with conducting risk management planning, identification, analysis, responses and monitoring and control on the project. The objective is to increase probability of positive events and reduce the probability of events having adverse effects on the project.
In order to carry out the project I choose Failure Mode and Effect method and dividing the complete process into six different parts to have better control and understanding of risks involved.
Risk Management Planning - Deciding upon how to approach, plan and execute the risk management activities for the project.
Risk Identification - Determining which risks might affect the project and demonstrating their characteristics.
Qualitative Risk Analysis - Prioritising risks for subsequent further analysis or action by accessing and combining their probability of occurrence and impact.
Quantitative Risk Analysis - Numerically analysing the effect on overall project.
Risk Response Planning - Developing options and actions to enhance the opportunity and to reduce treat to project objectives.
Risk monitoring and control - Tracking identified risks, monitoring residual risks, identify new risks, executing risk response plans and evaluating their effectiveness through out the project cycle.
All these six steps give extensive information about various risks involved in the project. The Failure Mode and Effect method benefits from Cause and Effect approach in many ways such as provides a well-documented record of improvements from corrective actions implemented and also its natural way of expressing risks and its probability. The risk management strategy provides idea of mitigating the risk through either sharing or simply allowing the risk to occur.
Performance Measurement Analysis: It helps to assess the magnitude of any variance that will invariably occur. The earned value technique compare the cumulative value of the budgeted cost of work performed at the original allocated budget amount to both the budgeted cost of work scheduled and to actual cost of work performed. The technique would be very beneficial in the project for cost control, resource management and production. An important part of cost control will be to determine the cause of variance, the magnitude of the variance and to decide if the variance requires corrective action. This technique involves developing these key values for each scheduled work package:
1. Planned Value: It is the budgeted cost for the work scheduled to be completed on a work based package component up to a given point in time.
Earned Value: It is the budgeted amount for the work actually completed on the schedule work based package component during a given time period.
Actual Cost: It is the total cost incurrent in accomplishing work on a scheduled WBS component during a given time period.
The Planned Value, Estimated Value and Actual cost values will be used in combination to provide performance measures of whether or not work is accomplished as planned at any given point of time. The most commonly used measures are cost variance and schedule variance. The amount of variance of the CV and SV values tends to decrease as the project reach the completion due to the compensation effect of more work being accomplished.
Forecasting about future of the project is very essential for project success, as it would decrease the uncertainties that could be faced in future. This would include making estimated of conditions in the project's future based on information and knowledge available at the time of the forecast. It would be generated, updated and reissued based on work performance information provided as the project is executed and progressed.