From the figure given in the problem sheet, the system equations are:
We can also write the system equations in the form of:-
Where A, B, C are Matrices
Thus the matrix form of the equation is:
Suppose
where D2 is known value.
Thus
From Part 1 we can see that A and B are as follows:
So the A Matrix is
In the Problem it's given that
Hence
Where = Eigen Values, I = Identity Matrix
By substituting the Values of A and I which is the identity matrix we get the Eigen Values as:
Stiffness Factor =
Order of Stiffness Factor =
We can write the system in the form of:
Where
Taking the Laplace Transform of the System, we have
By Calculating the Inverse of the Matrix we get:
To Expand Y (S) we can implement partial function:
Let assume
Then,
Let assume
Then,
Therefore,
Taking Inverse Laplace Transform on Y(S) we achieve:
Hence this is the analytical solution for the observation function Y.
Using Graph peeling technique, which assumes that the system is linear.
Y(t) can be expressed as:
Where  and
Factor out the term with the smallest exponential which is A 2e-2
 t we get,
If 1 is sufficiently larger then 2, then for large t we have:
Thus if we take log on both side we get:
Therefore, Log Y(t) = Log(A 2 - 2 t). If we plot the graph with log y(t) vs t. This straight line graph would have gradient equal to -2 and intercept equals to Log A 2.
From the Graph 1 we can compute the Gradient and the intercept of log y(t) which is asymptote to y(t).
Gradient
Intercept
Since we know the values of A 2 and 2 we can compute A 2e-2 t. The same principle can be used to estimate the value of A 1 and 1.
After calculation, the following table was used to plot the graph with log z(t) vs t.
From the graph 2 we can get:
Gradient
Intercept
Thus we have,
These values are our initial guesses in the problem. Now plot 1 and 2 to get the best fit. From Graph 3 we achieved the best fit results:
Substituting these values into the equation:
We get,
Take Laplace Transform on y(t) obtained in part v:
(1)
The Equation we derived in part iv was
Given,
Substituting the values in above equations give:
(2)
If we bring together Equation 1 and 2 we get two possible cases:
Case 1:
Let
Then we get
Case 2:
Let
Then we get
Hence the possible two set of values for K 01, K 12, C 1 are:
From part iv we got:
From part v we got:
Using two different values of we plotted two different sum of exponential curves as shown in Graph 4 and the difference between the two has been plotted in Graph 5.