In his Even to generally sympathetic commentators, Hegelian epistemology can be a cause for discomfort. Though the metaphysical grandness of his entire system cannot be denied, it is not generally recognized that Hegel made use of the proper philosophical techniques to ensure the epistemological security of that system. The above quote is often cited to reveal such lack of acknowledgement of the problems posed by epistemology; specifically, the problem of an initial justificatory criterion for adequate cognition. This purported lack of attention, critics claim, is sufficiently problematic to call the worth of his entire system into serious question. On Scruton's reading,
Further, on the issue of beginning a philosophical inquiry without establishing a criterion which justifies it, Baillie writes that "whether thought is able to know, or how far it can know being at all, is a problem which from the start he never seems to have considered, at any rate never discussed at length,"
To be sure, the concerns of skepticism are central to epistemological integrity. It is the voice that persistently asks 'how do you know?' in order that the need for For without this level of rigour, the claims made in whatever philosophical system can be tossed indifferently into the realm of arbitrary opinion. What the above commentators see in Hegel is inattention to the standards by which one ought to be guided in any philosophical inquiry concerning the cognition of being. Presumably, then, such claims could be shown to be at best uncharitable, and at worst simply false, if it could be proven that Hegel
With respect to his Now, the size and complexity of such an issue as the role of skepticism in Hegel's thought, or a thorough epistemological defense of Hegel's system, is certainly beyond the scope of the present essay. Specifically, I will address what I take to be the gross misconception that Hegel's What will emerge is a picture of the
As an entry point into our discussion, and in the interest of charity towards Hegel's critics, we would do well to first note to what extent an acquaintance with the When introducing the project he will undertake, he questions the value of an attitude that tirelessly doubts the very possibility of a cognition of being and asks: "Should we not be concerned as to whether this fear of error is not just the error itself?" He denounces that "conceit which understands how to belittle every truth, in order to turn back into itself and gloat over its own understanding" At first glance, it may understandably raise suspicion that Hegel uses a mere four pages to demonstrate the ultimately self-corrupting contradictions of the skeptic's position. It is here that he refers to that position as "a purely casual, confused medley, the dizziness of a perpetually self-engendered disorder"
What one could gather from passages like these is that Hegel takes skepticism to be ineffectual, even frivolous; moreover, conflicted and misguided in its very conception. However, we must read conscientiously in order to make sense of the context in which such statements are made, and to appreciate a fundamental distinction Hegel uses them to draw. This is the distinction between the skepticism he sees as inadequate and his own conception of what he calls "thoroughgoing skepticism". For Hegel, skepticism as it is normally encountered in philosophy is simply not radical enough. What his thoroughgoing skepticism cannot be is a mere suspension of some kinds of belief while others are held fast to dogmatically (e.g. where a base kind of sense immediacy is considered indubitable). Nor can it be a singularly negative stance where the result produced is no more than an insistence upon the impossibility of knowing. Instead, a Hegelian skepticism will be thorough: it will pursue all existing certainties, being satisfied with nothing less than claims with logical necessity. It will also be productive: skeptical inquiry, though in its outset is undeniably negative, yields a positive result insofar as it By remaining one-sidedly negative, skepticism typically understood fails to recognize its determining, and thereby affirmative, nature.
We now turn to the first part of the argument: the methodological conception of the It is my hope that what will be gained is an understanding of how Hegel's method of investigation, set out in his introduction, reveals an earnest respect for the issues presented by skepticism. Rather than seeking to attribute attention to a specific skeptical argument or trope to Hegel's process of thinking, I will highlight his insistence upon a skeptical level of rigour in general. What this translates into is a refusal to make use of unjustified assumptions, dogmatic authority, or the arbitrary positing of standards or criteria of adequacy.
The task Hegel sets out for himself in the He effectively takes on the question: how can we be justified in philosophizing at all? The fact of absolute knowing, that knowing where cognizing consciousness and cognized object cease to be conceived separately, must be shown to be necessary, before we can begin to make claims about the nature of being. The target of Hegel's analysis is na The project is a phenomenology insofar as it looks at the way in which the world Hegel will not tell us what consciousness is, nor will he advance preliminary criteria for the knowledge that is 'absolute' or 'scientific'. What he will do, is ask that we join him in merely What the process reveals cannot be known ahead of time, and it can justify itself as necessary and warranted only as it progresses. So, in order to begin an inquiry into "the actual cognition of what truly is", Quite appropriately, the task of the introduction is then to elucidate what this beginning does and does not entail, and how, once we understand from where we start, we are able to move forward. Or, to be more Hegelian, to prepare to see how what must move
What makes Hegel's introduction so challenging for the reader is that he truly does not go past introducing. Here, what seems immediately to be called for, if we are to begin an investigation into the nature of true cognition, is a preliminary For if we don't know how to recognize the cognition that is true, how are we to proceed?
To be sure, Hegel does provide us with the criterion by which we will be able to distinguish actual from merely apparent cognition, but he resolutely refuses to allow that criterion to be the expression of an antecedent decision about The method of the inquiry need only employ the criterion of consciousness itself. Although Kant had recently made much philosophical hay of the distinction between being-for-another and being-in-itself, the recognition of that distinction as a central problem in epistemology has persisted since Plato's time. Hegel too is aware of the fundamental nature of this division:
The difficulty, then, is that although knowledge is an object However, Hegel points out that, insofar as the project of dissociating the two from each other is a project for consciousness, both being-for-another and being-in-itself "If the comparison shows that these two moments do not correspond to one another, it would seem that consciousness must alter its knowledge to make it conform to the object". This conflict, and the subsequent alteration of consciousness and its objects as both move into a new relationship of cognition, is the dialectical movement of experience. As we look on at consciousness comparing itself to its object, the criterion it tests will change with each successive form of consciousness; for "what evolves in the Science of Experience is the standard by which the truth-testing is done". And because this comparison takes place entirely within consciousness, the introduction of external criteria would be superfluous. Indeed, "it is precisely when we leave these aside that we succeed in contemplating the matter in hand as it is
It is the conception of this method that inspires comments very much in the spirit of the opening quotes of this essay. For such critics, the framework of the inquiry laid out in Hegel's introduction is a beginning that is all too bare. It does not claim in what way cognition can actually come to terms with being, if it can at all. About knowing itself, it offers only the most minimal identification: the being of something for consciousness. But most strikingly of all, it does not hold up an accepted standard of the in-itself of knowing and promise to anchor the examination with respect to its agreement or disagreement with that standard. The reader is instead asked to faithfully enter a process that claims to contain no promised or fixed result, and can only demonstrate its necessity through its completion. These critics, and defenders of epistemological rigour, charge that Hegel is asking us to begin by merely
These objections, however, are entirely mistaken. To be sure, Hegel He could have, like Fichte and Schelling, begun with the assertion of the certainty of the Ego. The epistemological project would then have been one of identifying the consciousness of reality with that indubitable consciousness of self. Or, he could have, like Hume, decided from the start that knowing could only be the grasping of that which is incontrovertibly true, leading to the conclusion that any kind of metaphysics beyond tautological statements is impossible. Or, he could have, like Kant, committed himself to the idea that the subject's very way of making sense of the world necessarily precludes her from reaching a knowledge of the way the world is in itself. The problem with these possibilities, for Hegel, is that a demonstration of the Why ought we assume what any of these positions assume (i.e.  By what authority ought we take any of these standards as 'accepted'? As long as no justification is offered, there is no reason why we should be convinced of its truth, for " As Lauer writes, "the determination of such conditions can be only the His critics take issue with exactly what should put their minds at ease: Hegel 'enters the waters' of the experience of consciousness To claim, as Baillie does, that for Hegel there was no problem of knowledge, 'whether philosophical or any sort,' is simply wrong. The seeming elusiveness of Hegel's introduction is a reflection of his interest in the
Skepticism opposes dogmatism: it should now be clear that Hegel does as well. The method of the His interest in epistemological rigour is Hegel's own words make this abundantly clear: "but when we consider something in thought, we soon become aware that thoughtful consideration implies the requirement that the
However, the degree of skepticism's involvement in the Not only does it play a formative role in the method as set out in the introduction, it is also taken up as an essential moment of the dialectical progression of the entire work. A stance of skeptical negativity persists throughout the entire The overcoming of erroneous certainties, however, is only the negative side to what is wholly a productive movement. For Hegel, skepticism, recognized in its self-completion, is We now turn to the transitions of the opening section, 'Consciousness,' in order to gain an understanding of this concept of determinate negation in the text itself.
The This is the knowledge of what immediately is, of what is simply Here the object is thought to be grasped most truthfully, as what occurs is merely a registering: the object is not at all changed by consciousness' receiving of it, and so accepts it in all its richness and detail as In other words, no distortion by the subject equals no error in cognition. Once this form of consciousness is The immediacy it claims for itself is corrupted insofar as the necessary structure of the experience is actually one of mediation: there is a sensed content only because there is a sensing self, and there is only a sensing self because there is a sensed content. What each is, is mediated by the existence of the other element in the structure. For what it wants to express is a particular, a singularity that presents itself in sensuous immediacy, such as Through the very way sense-certainty attempts to remain intimate with the full reality of its object, by maintaining itself as a thoughtless pointing, it effectively frustrates the possibility of grasping the object at all; for it cannot
So, from the assumption that immediacy is the most adequate way for consciousness to grasp its object, what emerged was the realization that this kind of immediacy is entirely indeterminate. The The dialectical movement is "at once a
The object of perception is no longer the immediate 'this-here-now' of sense-certainty, presented as unrelated sense-data, but is rather grasped as a 'thing' that is mediated by numerous universal The object is no longer the way it is because of some sort of intending or pointing on behalf of the subject, but is seen as manifesting a certain number of common properties which serve to determine it (e.g. the thing is spherical, white, salty, etc.). The test at this level is the same as at the previous one: we take a long hard look at the form consciousness has taken and wait to see if, through the unfolding of its own position, it can maintain its integrity. The more particular question in front of consciousness is now: can perception individualize its object? Also, it is only the 'thing-ness' of the thing that is responsible for the gathering together of what are in themselves independent and indifferent properties; the thing is 'this' and Perception's way of grasping its object, however, leads it into contradiction. Consciousness perceives an object as a singular thing distinct from other things. However, the properties which make the thing what it is are universal, and so are properties of many things; hence, the thing's supposed singularity comes into conflict with the universality of its constituting properties. Further, although these properties are understood to be determinate, i.e. they in themselves exclude their opposite, there are many properties Perception's object is at once exclusive and not-exclusive. What perception lacks is an ability to grasp a thing with universal properties that are nonetheless inextricably As long as the properties of a thing are thought of as independent of one another, consciousness will never be able to account for how universal properties can determine a thing in its unique identity.
The dialectic continues: perception's inability to determine its object points us forward. Its object manifests itself to the senses as a group of properties, but perception's status as a mere "spectator consciousness" Only if the interrelationship of these universal properties can be grasped will the object be determined as individual; only if the thing can be understood as an Perception, however, because it is still tied to sensuous presentation, cannot furnish the level of universality needed for the employment of It is only with concepts that the nature of the thing and all its interrelated properties can be explained; mere percepts will never explain themselves. This further stage of mediation, of "unconditioned universality"
We are now in a position to reflect upon what Hegel presents to us. What in each case occurs is that consciousness makes a claim or takes up a stance towards its object and effectively says: 'in this way I Along with Hegel, 'we' grant this presumption without prejudice and simply observe the making explicit of implicit commitments in the position that consciousness has adopted. And yet, in a sense the relationship between 'us' and consciousness is simultaneously observational It is as if 'we' are witnessing consciousness being subjected to the interrogating skeptic: rather than undermining the other's position by appealing to a dogmatically held principle that is 'more veridical' than one's opponent, consciousness is shown that its undoing comes from within itself - in other words, immanently.
It is this critical or skeptical moment that at each level of consciousness brings forth the contradictions inherent in the claim to knowledge being made, and thus forces consciousness to move on away from that which is unsatisfactory. For Hegel, this is necessarily the "way of despair", Neither is adequate to the other, and so consciousness attempts to eliminate that difference through negation. It is that skeptical consciousness, recognizing that "the finite is not restricted merely from the outside; rather it sublates itself by virtue of its own nature, and passes over, of itself, into its opposite," "It does not bring about its own theory, but merely serves as a principle to detect contradictions, negate them, and move on from them". Manifest discrepancies are the motor of the dialectic, and hence the source of a 'need'".
Our understanding of the progress of the dialectic remains general. What still needs to be clarified, however, is how exactly the abandoning of a position shown to be inadequate leads to the form of consciousness that it does?
We took notice early on of the way in which Hegel separated his 'thoroughgoing' skepticism with skepticism typically understood. Here the nature of this distinction becomes essential to our discussion. The problem with standard skepticism, according to Hegel, was its insistence upon In Sextus Empiricus, the skeptic's achievement is merely "the state of quietude in respect of matter of opinion" "Skepticism deduces no result, nor does it express its negation as anything positive". The nothing which results is It has a content and thus a positive result. This principle, whereby negation itself points beyond to a new content, Hegel calls
So, negation works to move the dialectic forward, and to move consciousness to a more adequate form, in a Indeed, the immanence of the whole project depends on this idea that the next step is pointed to necessarily out of the very dissolution of the present one (i.e. that it is not introduced from without). And this is precisely what we saw from sense-certainty to understanding. Just as it is in the very way consciousness takes its object that causes it to become mired in contradiction, it is the very way in which each form fails that fixes the character of the next attempt, for "in the negation the transition has been made".
Taken up this way in the Considering even the brief explanations offered here, the idea that Hegel was careless with regard to epistemology becomes increasingly implausible. To claim either that the rigour of justification and necessity was unimportant in his work, or that he took no interest in the issues of skepticism, is contradicted by close attention to the works themselves. Hegel takes skepticism seriously; but, he does not allow it to paralyze philosophy. Indeed, "Hegel contends that skepticism's target is dogmatism, not philosophy, for skepticism, rightly understood, is a permanent element in genuine speculative philosophy". We need only look to his 1802 essay "On the Relationship of Skepticism to Philosophy, Exposition of its Different Modifications and Comparison of the Latest Form with the Ancient One", to see this clearly. It is there that he writes: "skepticism itself is in its innermost heart at one with every true philosophy".