The Midland Metro is part of
The public transport industry is one which contains numerous competing technologies (cars, buses, trains etc.) but no immediate competition within the light rail technology itself. This phenomenon is characteristic of
These companies have many similarities. For example, regarding the industrial structure, five of these seven firms were designed, built and maintained by public sector companies. This diffusion has not occurred by chance; the reason for it is essentially government control as is explained later.
The structure of the light rail industry is such that each localised firm has a monopoly for light rail travel. In the wider context of all public transport, trams do not have a monopoly. A comparison of Hirschman-Herfindal indices (the index shows dominance on the scale 0 to 1 where 0 corresponds to perfect competition and 1 is a total monopoly);
Source for part ii figures is reference one, see below
Information regarding the performance of the industry in relation to other modes of public transport is presented here. The figures used in the above HHI calculation were taken from this table. Yellow columns were assumed to be "public transport" technologies and "other rail" was assumed to be all light rail. Note that Part ii data includes all areas of the UK so the HHI coefficient is lower than it would be should only light rail served areas be considered.
These figures show how one must consider trams in the wider context of public and private/ personal transport in order to get a meaningful picture of their place in industry.
As discussed above there are no instances in the UK where light rail operators are in direct competition. The public transport sector as a whole is still worthy of scrutiny.
The Midland Metro is a part of On closer inspection, it is clear that There are no providers of a network in direct competition with
 This is an email response from
 Only commercially run routes can be serviced by operators who do not win contracts. This situation arises because
Recent patronage figures are discouraging. The Midland Metro figures are some of the most disappointing as can be seen in the table below.
The financial figures are no more encouraging as this source shows.
With the exception of the Sheffield Supertram this last financial year, none of the light rail systems in Sheffield, the West Midlands, Manchester or Croydon have made a profit in the last two years. Based on the figures shown, on average there has been a It is fair to say that the industry is inefficient at creating profit at present.
In terms of the return on total capital employed, the Metro is not performing well. Using the formula shown here
and working with the initial capital used to set up the business in 1999 ( A value close to 1% would be good; anything below zero is poor.
"Patronage is expected to build up over time, reaching maturity after some five years of operation" This information somewhat alleviates the impact of the financial and patronage figures but one should note that those five years have passed for the Sheffield and Midland providers and for the majority of the Manchester system. In reference to the life cycle of the product, light rail systems are somewhere between rising star and maturity.
Barriers to entry are considerable. Three key barriers are the vast amount of capital required for business establishment, legal and government restrictions and, to a lesser extent, switching costs. These barriers are explored below.
Capital Intensity required for business setup
The table below shows capital investment in some light rail systems shown on the map on the first page. The figures show that, realistically, a capital investment in the order of
According to the National Audit Office's report already referred to, the cost of construction of light rail systems is rising and although most of the schemes have been kept within their budgets, this has been achieved by excluding some of the design features that were incorporated in the original plans.
Legal or Government enforced restrictions
"Local authorities decide whether a new light rail line or system is appropriate for their area and usually have to seek funds from the Department [for transport] and be granted legal powers by the Secretary of State for Transport before their schemes can proceed."
This has threefold implications for prospective market entrants;
the local authority must be satisfied that a new light rail system is appropriate;
funding must be accumulated;
the Secretary of State for Transport must grant the scheme permission to be constructed.
Likely costs incurred overcoming these problems would be;
Switching costs
Customers who already use the Midland Metro will have passes which are only valid on Metro trams. Users may not be willing to purchase a second pass for a new operator's trams which would affect passenger numbers adversely. A market collusion with
With an understanding of these barriers to entry the argument for acquisition is stronger than that for setting up a new firm. Acquisition is a more attractive business venture because it removes two of the barriers to entry described above, those being government restrictions and switching costs. These do not apply since a new firm would not need to construct a new line and would not need to gain local or central government backing or financial support. Furthermore, provided
With reference to Michael Porter's generic strategies for business placement within a given industry, a A low cost and industry wide strategy (the cost leadership strategy) would maintain the widest possible customer base and is the only strategy that would be supported by government since a fundamental principle of public transport is service for all.
Investment required for a new light rail system would be a high risk venture and, in contrast to some high risk business opportunities, there does not appear to be a lucrative reward for those who succeed.
The acquisition of Midland Metro would not be as risky a business manoeuvre for reasons detailed in the previous section. My recommendation is that, if you are to either set up a new business in competition with the Midland Metro or attempt an acquisition of that company, then an acquisition would be the best strategy. Irrespective of the decision to purchase Midland Metro or establish a competitor, a cost leadership strategy would be most appropriate.
It is possible that given the rising concerns about the impact our way of life is having on the environment that government may increase its efforts to persuade people to use public/ environmentally friendly modes of transport. If such a campaign were to be successful then light rail and other public transport could become a much more attractive industry. It may be worth waiting for a more favourable climate (in terms of personal transport) before attempting to enter this industry.