The Patient was advised by his GP to come into hospital,
Cirrhosis of the liver can lead to portal hypertension. Portal hypertension is defined as a portal pressure of 10-12mmHg it arises in cirrhosis because the liver architecture is destroyed and it becomes congested. Portal venous blood can no longer escape through the normal channels of the sinusoids to central hepatic venules. This can lead to ascites because increased pressure in the portal system leads to transudation of fluid into the peritoneal cavity causing it to swell. Patients with liver disease may also show a low serum albumin due to poor liver function. Low albumin levels will also contribute to ascites by further reducing the plasma oncotic pressure.
The social history given by The patient admits that the divorce from his wife and the death of both of his parents in a short period of time led him to drinking as a way of coping. Upsetting and traumatic life events are a common cause for turning to excessive alcohol consumption as a way of coping with stress.
Upon a general and abdominal examination I would be looking for clinical signs to back up the diagnosis of alcoholic liver disease such as clubbing, palmer erythema, dupuytrens contracture, hepatic flap, jaundice, nutritional deficiencies, spider naevi, gynaecomastia, caputs medusa, ascites, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly and oedema.
Due to weight loss another cause for this presentation could be a malignancy, possibly in the bowel and liver.
The findings of the examination all point to alcoholic liver disease resulting in ascites. The positive shifting dullness test confirms the presence of fluid in the peritoneal cavity. The dressing on the right flank is from an abdominal drain, which was used to remove the excess fluid in the peritoneal cavity.
The diagnosis of chronic liver disease is supported by a variety of the clinical signs seen. Dupuytrens contracture is a thickening of the palmer aponeurosis and often seen in alcoholic cirrhosis. Beau's lines seen in the fingernail are indicative of acute severe illness. The presence of a hepatic flap is characteristic of hepatic encephalopathy which occurs in severe hepatocellular disease and wasting of the facial muscles supports the patients account of weight loss. It is often the case that alcoholics do not have a sufficient nutritious diet, the patient also described himself of not having a large appetite so it is possible that Spider naevi are seen in patients with chronic liver disease and are caused by local vascular dilatation.
A key clinical sign seen in this patient was the yellow discoloration of the sclera indicating jaundice. Jaundice is by definition a serum bilirubin concentration of greater than 50mol/l. Bilirubin is the breakdown product of red blood cells, it is produced in the spleen and from there travels in the blood to the liver. In the liver it is conjugated into bile so that it can be excreted in the urine. Jaundice is divided into three types, pre-hepatic, hepatic and post-hepatic. Pre-hepatic jaundice arises from the increased breakdown of red cells. Post hepatic jaundice is caused by obstruction to bile flow at any point in the billary tree, most commonly from a gall stone. Hepatic Jaundice is seen in patients with alcoholic liver disease. It occurs because damage to the liver prevents the hepatocytes conjugating bilirubin into bile and so you get a build up of bilirubin in the plasma. It presents with yellow discoloration of the skin, dark urine and pale stools.
Caputs medusa are seen when the veins around the umbilicus are dilated. This is a complication of portal hypertension, when portal pressure is raised one escape route for venous blood is via porto-systemic anastomoses, which open in response to increased portal pressure. The channels can become very distended with blood and are called varices. They are of huge clinical importance if they become very distended because they are fragile and can rupture. This is a serious complication resulting in torrential haemorrhage, which can be fatal. They are found around the umbilicus, in the anal/rectal area where they are known as haemorrhoids and in the oesophagus. Varices in the oesophagus are particularly vulnerable to rupture due to erosion by gastric acid.
In summary, This has led to jaundice and portal hypertension resulting in the opening of porto-systemic shunts demonstrated by umbilicus varices Increased pressure in the portal system has led to transudation of fluid into the peritoneal cavity and the development of ascites.
Diagnosis: Alcoholic Liver Disease
The patients symptoms arise from drinking too much alcohol, however the circumstances which lead this patient to drinking are key to his management. Due to the severity of the presentation it is likely that the patient is consuming far more than 6 units/week. Acceptance of a drinking problem by the patient is the first step in conquering the addiction. If he can be encouraged to stop drinking then his physical health will improve. The key to this is psychological; the precipitating event seems to be the divorce from his wife and the death of his parents. The patient may require some counselling about these events to overcome his addiction.
The serious complications arising from alcoholism and some insight as to why people turn to drinking to help them cope.