The patient was brought into hospital (A&amp;E) by ambulance six weeks ago, following a fall in the street.
At the present moment there is no single likely cause as recurrent falls in the elderly can occur for many reasons.
Mr  could be having :
Transient ischaemic attacks (TIA) this is a possibility as smoking is a risk factor.
The falls could be cardiogenic in origin, such as atrial fibrillation which would mean that there is a decreased amount of circulating oxygen in the blood.
The patients antihypertensive medication may be too high causing him to become hypotensive, low blood pressure can cause falls especially when rising from sitting.
Mr  may be suffering with poor coordination and balance ether due to a cerebellar lesion or a neuromuscular condition.
As the patient is on a drug to correct his electrolyte imbalance this could be the origin as his falls, hyponatraemia can cause a fall.
Other causes of falls which are not suggested by the history but may need to be checked are poor vision, poor fitting shoes, drugs, alcohol, epilepsy and Parkinson's disease.
For this patient upon examination, particular signs to be looked for are irregular pulse, low blood pressure (supine and standing), weakness and loss of sensation; coordination and oedema which may help elicit the cause. Examinations to be carried out are a full general examination and a full neurological examination.
Positive signs noted upon examination were pallor in the conjunctiva, this suggest anaemia which is a common cause for a fall in the elderly. The pulse was regular and so atrial fibrillation is not the cause in this case. Postural hypotension is still a possible cause as this could not be tested properly in the examination.
The mini mental examination demonstrated that this patient was very confused and possible was suffering with dementia, it should however be noted that this is very crude test especially in someone who has been in hospital for some time. Most people lose a sense of what day it is when admitted for long periods. Multi infarct dementia can not be ruled out.
Significantly the patient was cachexic, with a persistent productive cough and central cyanosis. In light of a 57 pack year history a carcinoma of the lung could be present. There is a small cell carcinoma of the lung which is associated with the syndrome of inappropriate secretion of ADH (anti diuretic hormone). These tumours produce ADH which causes water retention and a subsequent electrolyte imbalance which could lead to falls. This diagnosis fits well with the history and examination findings.
Possible diagnoses for this patient:
Anaemia
Postural hypotension , the patients anti-hypotensive medication was too high further aggravating the falls
Transient ischaemic attacks and multi infarct dementia
Lung carcinoma and SIADH (syndrome of inappropriate secretion of ADH)
Following further investigation, the patient was identified to have a small cell carcinoma of the lung, secreting ADH and causing an electrolyte imbalance. The cancer had already spread to the mediastinum and pericardium and so the patient was not suitable for surgery. Mr  was aware of his diagnosis but would not acknowledge the severity of the condition. He was very distressed being kept in hospital and wished to have no treatment for the cancer but would have treatment for his electrolyte imbalance.
As Mr  wishes to go home to die, at present he cannot cope alone and so would need a palliative care package to be arranged in the community. Even though this may be difficult to achieve it is probably the best course of action for the patient as he will most likely continue to become more distressed and depressed in the hospital.
The patient needs treatment for his anaemia and close monitoring of his electrolyte imbalance.
His anti-hypertensive medication should be reduced to prevent further aggravation of the falls.
Palliative care package should be arranged
Every effort to allow Mr  to go home as he is very distressed in hospital should be made; social services may be of some help with this problem.
This case has given me experience of taking a history and examining a confused patient, it has introduced a condition which I was not aware of previously and shown me that not every patient will want all medical interventions possible.