Normalised colour signals are given as , , . The system gamma value is given as  and display gamma value as .
Luminosity coefficients are taken as ,  and .
This allows corrected luminance values for each colour to be calculated as follows:
.
Transmitted luminance can then be calculated:
.
Colour difference signals are then:
.
The displayed luminance can also be calculated:
Consider the carrier signal as a signal of the form , where A0 is the carrier amplitude and (0 is the carrier frequency. The modulating signal can be considered in the form  where m is the modulation depth (the ratio of modulated amplitude to carrier amplitude) and (m is the modulating frequency. In order to modulate the carrier, these two signals are multiplied using an analogue multiplier as shown in the diagram below to produce a DSB/SC signal.
Values for variables are given as follows:
,
,
peak (half the 10V peak-to-peak value given) and  peak so .
In DSB/SC, the carrier is suppressed therefore the amplitude at the carrier frequency is 0V. The RMS amplitude of the sidebands is given by  and . These will be at their maximum when  and  therefore substituting gives the RMS sideband amplitudes as .
DSB/SC signals cannot normally be detected by simple AM detectors as no carrier frequency is present and the modulation data may be negative. In order to solve this problem, the carrier must be transmitted along with the signal, for example by adding a pilot tone to the transmitted signal; this will also introduce a DC component to the modulated signal thus solving the problem of the signal being negative.
DSB/SC signals are normally detected by generating a carrier at the receiver, which is of exactly the correct frequency and exactly in phase with the original carrier, then multiplying the received signal by this carrier signal and low-pass filtering the result.
The characteristics of the amplifiers are specified as:
, , .
,  and .
Overall noise figure of a cascaded amplifier system can be calculated using the following equation:
where Ga is the gain of the first filter in the system, Gb is the gain of the second filter, Gc is the gain of the third filter, and Fa - Fc are the noise figures of the respective filters.
Hence in the case of filter 1 in first position (i.e. ), filter 2 in second position (i.e. ) and filter 3 in third position (i.e. ):
.
For an optimal noise figure, filters should generally be arranged with the smallest noise figure in first position and the largest in last position, as the first makes the largest contribution to the overall noise figure and the last makes the smallest contribution. With this rule, arranging the filters with filter 1 in position 1, filter 3 in position 2 and filter 2 in position 3 should produce the smallest overall noise figure. As there are only 5 possible permutations, it is possible to test them all to determine if this is indeed correct:
1. , , :
* best
2. , , :
3. , , :
4. , , :
5. , , :
As predicted, the configuration with filter 1 in position 1, filter 3 in position 2 and filter 2 in position 3 produces the smallest overall noise figure. However the difference in noise figure between this configuration and the original configuration is very small.