The title of the project is "Comparison of Block and Stream Ciphers".
Due to the technological developments in telecommunications in recent years, the need for new methods of maintaining security and privacy over insecure communication media has emerged. This is usually achieved through using some form of data encryption.
Data encryption involves taking some type of data (in computer communications, generally in binary form) and in some way altering it so that only the intended recipient - and possibly also the sender - can work out what the original data was. The alteration generally involves either rearranging the characters in the data, or replacing certain characters with other characters, or may involve a combination of both of these.
Encryption algorithms can be split into two general categories: block ciphers (which encrypt multiple characters at a time) and steam ciphers (which encrypt data character by character). There are many different algorithms within these categories, and often even different ways of implementing the basic algorithms, which leads to a huge array of choices for any given application.
No major difficulties have been encountered to date. All targets have been met and the project appears to be proceeding well. It is not envisaged at this stage that any changes to the original list of objectives will be necessary, and it seems likely that all of the original objectives will be achieved within the timescale available.
The initial timetable proposed appears to have been very accurate to date with all objectives being completed on target. Having written up - and redrafted as appropriate - a large amount of the research as it was done is likely to free up an appreciable amount of time towards the end of the project as a considerable amount of the final write-up will already have been drafted to a very high standard. This will hopefully mean that fewer redrafts are necessary, and will certainly be an excellent starting point for the report.
It is recognised, however, that just because no problems have occurred to date does not mean that none will arise in the future. The main areas which have been identified as potentially problematic are the implementation and comparison phases, which will occur mainly in term 2. It is not envisaged that any specification changes would be necessary, but it is possible (as the author has little previous experience in these areas) that the time required has been underestimated and therefore that these phases may take longer than anticipated. As has previously been mentioned, however, there is some time which was originally to be spent writing up the project which has now been freed up, allowing scope for small timetable adjustments to be made without causing disruption to the project.
Assuming that the timetable for the holidays and term 2 is reasonably accurate and that no adjustments are required, the time which has been freed up by writing up research as it is done may be able to be used to develop the project further. One possible area which may be interesting to investigate further would be exactly why the encryption algorithms selected for investigation were chosen for the applications they are used in - for example, why A5 is used in GSM networks. An alternative could be to choose some other property (apart from speed and resistance to attack) to compare the algorithms with.