Mitochondrial myopathies in particular those that are situated in the cytochrome Superoxide damage to DNA and protein is a major contributing factor in many diseases of old age. Thus an understanding of the structure and mechanism of the complex is central to our understanding of the aging process. The mechanism of the Q-cycle will be discussed first, then that of the structure of the mammalian cytochrome Finally the evidence for the movement and function of the iron sulphur protein will be discussed with reference to the Q-cycle
Cytochrome Located in the inner mitochondria, the complex catalyses electron transfer from ubiquinol to cytochrome
Mitochondrial myopathies especially those that are situated in the cytochrome Molecular oxygen has access to the ubisemiquinone anion located at the Qo site; there is a finite chance that it may donate its electron to O These superoxides are capable of causing oxidative damage to the surrounding DNA and protein this is a major contributing factor in many diseases of old age. Thus an understanding of the mechanism of the
Ubiquinone is a quinine derivative with a long isoprenoid tail, the number of isoprenoid units depends on the species e.g. mammals contain 10 isoprene units. Quinones can exist in three oxidation states (Figure 1); electron transfer reactions are coupled to proton binding and release a feature key to cytochrome
The mode of function of cytochrome One electron is conveyed to the Rieske iron-sulphur cluster yielding a ubisemiquinone anion, which reduces the cytochrome The second electron is transferred from the ubisemiquinone anion to cytochrome As ubiquinol is at the Q
In the second turnover a second molecule of ubiquinol binds to the Qo site and the Qo site reactions are repeated. As before a ubisemiquinone anion is formed in at the Qo site. Two further protons are deposited on the cytoplasmic side through the oxidation of ubiquinol. The second electron is transferred from the ubisemiquinone anion to cytochrome Upon the addition of this second electron, the ubisemiquinone anion takes up two protons from the matrix to form ubiquinol. The removal of these two protons from the matrix contributes to the formation of the proton gradient (Figure 2b).
After two complete turnovers of cytochrome Two molecules of cytochrome c are reduced, four protons are released in the cytoplasmic side and two protons are removed form the mitochondrial matrix.
The cytochrome The dimmer extends from the membrane 75
The three subunits which form the catalytic core of the enzyme are as follows: the Rieske Fe-S subunit which contains a [2Fe2S] cluster non-covalently liganded to the protein through two cysteines and two histidines; cytochrome The cytochrome
The topographical arrangement of the three electron transfer protein subunits in the cytochrome Cytochrome The redox potential of the haem
Structural analysis of the
(Figure: 4).
From X-ray crystallographic studies of cytochrome In native bovine crystals only a small intensity anomalous signal for 2Fe-2S was found to haem In the presence of inhibitors such as myxothiazol or methoxy-acrylates which are thought to displace Q or QH The Fe-S subunit is released from this fixed conformation. It is based on these structural studies and the evidence from the Q-cycle and that of the structure of the The details of this evidence which pointed towards the movement of the Rieske iron sulphur protein is described below.
The Q-cycle described previously, explains how the first electron from the QH The second electron takes the less thermodynamically favourable route [redox midpoint potential E The path of this second electron through the cytochrome
The distance between However the distance between haem
Ubiquinol enters the Qo site and binds to the P1 site, the ISP is in the b state conformation. The oxidised state of the 2Fe2S cluster of the Rieske protein is close to the surface of the protein and is held in position by electrostatic interactions with amino acid residues close to the Qo site. Ubiquinol becomes oxidised and one proton is released followed by the transfer of one electron to the ISP. Upon accepting this electron the 2Fe2S cluster becomes reduced therefore the strength of these stabilising interactions reduces. The Rieske protein dissociates and rotates through ~57 X-ray crystallographic studies have shown three positions rather than just two. Electron transfer to the haem of cytochrome
The Cytochrome From X-ray crystallographic studies of cytochrome A link between the conformational changes at the ubiquinol binding site and that of the movement of the iron sulphur protein has been discovered, and this is thought to be involved in the bifurcated oxidation of ubiquinol. The structure of the complex has provided great insight into its mechanistic features such as the bifurcated oxidation of ubiquinol. A greater understanding of the structure of the