Mrs She has lived in The patient lives alone in a council house, and receives a pension and attendance allowance which covers for her expenses. The house management, payment of bills and shopping have been done by
 In February 2005, Dr Until then In June 2005 She did not call for help, being found days later on her sitting-room's floor. The untreated burnt resulted in septicaemia. Her leg should have been amputated, but the patient refused treatment and admission to the Hospital. After this episode Additionally, she has a heel sore and bruises very easily. In October 2005 Her health suddenly deteriorated that week and health professionals thought she would perish the following weekend. Nevertheless she survived and recovered slightly. Possibly the visit of her youngest and favourite son, has given her a motivation to live. Furthermore, following the death scare, her son's wife,
The patient seems unaware of her condition even though she has been told that she is very ill. If confronted with such fact, she promptly denies it.
According to
 They have a close relationship which contrasts to the rest of the family who have not talked to each other after a family row, fifteen years ago. Following She learnt how to care for the patient from the carers, the district nurse (DN) and from She is present whenever the carers visit She also decides how much care is needed from the agencies, and assesses the need for extra painkillers. Since the death scare,
Conversely, During convalescence special care will be needed, so they decided to postpone the procedure until But if the patient survives for a long time
The patient's illness has contributed to a better family environment, revealed by the recent involvement of youngest son and
 The patient was found sleeping on a settee in her sitting-room, from which she would often fall off. She was not using her legs, moving herself on all-fours on her bum. Subsequently, she developed a pressure sore to her bum which was also treated by the DN.
The patient was offered care at home and a chair-raise, to enable transfer from the settee to the commode. It is thought that if
The current role of the DN is to monitor the pressure areas twice a week, to provide incontinence pads, to advise, support and informally train She liaises with other agencies and arranged for their services. In cooperation with the OT, a bed and a pressure mattress were organised and delivered in the space of five days.
 He visits the patient on request and provides support for He has won both the patient's and the carer's trust. He has not been able to fully examine He believes that in the long-term, the fact that she has not been admitted to Hospital or submitted to investigations has not affected the course of the disease substantially, considering the late involvement of the GP, the supposed extent of the disease, the psychological/emotional negative effects that an admission to Hospital would have had on the patient and the invasive nature of some investigations. The GP's respect for He faces the difficult dilemma of opting for the 'hands-off approach' thereby respecting the patient's wishes, versus establishing the diagnosis and being able to offer
The GP's prime concerns regard controlling the symptoms and dignifying the patient's death. This involves pain management, currently achieved with morphine patches and painkillers, and the control of mental confusion. The neurological symptoms (fluctuation of consciousness and mental confusion) are thought to be caused by oedema of brain tumours.
Another aim is to avoid an autopsy once The issue of a death certificate is difficult without an established diagnosis and the Coroner must decide whether a post-mortem is required. Dr
He is also concerned about the responsibility and workload on
 Nurses and healthcare assistants are trained to deal with terminally-ill patients and their families. They provide relief and support for Their aim is to increase their input, including a night shift, and to be present at the death bed, helping the family with the funeral arrangements. They communicate with the DN and can also liaise with the Macmillan nurses.
The involvement of This has made her reluctant to receive them. It is their responsibility to assess whether a package of care is required, and whether
 They wash and move
Realistically, the proposed level of care is available, depending solely on Conversely, respecting the patient's wishes may be difficult if she survives for a long time, depending on how much longer her son's surgery can wait, and
Key points in this case:
Traumatising experience in patient's childhood and subsequent phobia for doctors and hospitals impacted on her health negatively: her condition cannot be diagnosed and treated for adequately;
GP's tactful approach and respect for the patient enabled the building of bridges and the establishment of a trusting relationship allowing the provision of the best medical care in these circumstances and support for
Care was readily available and specialised equipment was quickly provided, contributing for the patient's comfort and the minimisation of further injury (pressure sores);