Levi Strauss & Co, which was "founded in 1853 by Bavarian immigrant Levi Strauss" is "one of the world's largest brand-name apparel marketers with sales in more than 100 countries". Its success is such that there is no other company "with a comparable global presence in the jeans and casual pants markets". The trademark, Levi's and their very first product, 501  Original Jeans are well recognized around the world and is registered in more than 160 countries with its headquarters in North America, Europe and in Asia. As stated by Peter Drucker, "The purpose of a business is to create a satisfied customer"; in order to suceed in today's competitive marketplace the company must be customer-orientated, where they must be able to successfully recognize the needs and wants of the customers. The Levi Strauss & Co managed to establish high standard customer value with long term customer relationship where they were effetive in using various marketing strategies.
The most succesful marketing strategy the Levi Strauss & Co have adaopted would be promotion, the main factor which allowed the Levi Strauss & Co to maintain its Brand leadership. Levi Strauss & Co has a high promotion spending, especially on TV commercials, which are considered to be the main contributor in advertsement strategy. For example, the company put 5 million on an iconic TV advertisement showing "a group of young people twisting and contorting their limbs into strange positions", which led to a rise in the market share from 10.6% in 1999 to 11.1% in 2000. The dominant role, which TV played was that it allowed 501  Original Jeans to establish and maintain its brand leadership by shaping up the consumer perception.
Consumer perception is greatly influenced by branding and successful brand must be able to create "feeling of confidence that brand is of higher quality or more desirable than similar products from competitors". Once this brand leadership is reached, people are willing to pay higher price for it even though the other competitors offer a better deal.
Once the Levi's established its brand, the price of 501  Original Jeans became inelastic, where even though the price increased the demand fell only slightly since high price signified high quality. Also, as a leading brand, Levi's worked to sustain its brand image successfully. For example it did not allow Tesco from selling 501  Original Jeans since it undermines its brand image. Instead, Levi Strauss & Co introduced discounts Jeans with a brand called Signature, which is sold in Wal-Mart Store in America.
The fact that the Levi Strauss & Co is able to establish and sustain its brand leadership and maintain high profit from selling 501  Original Jeans is also due to its successful tactics against the competitors by constantly "comparing its products, prices, channels of distribution and promotional methods" to identify areas where it can gain a competitive advantage. Levi's is a market challenger and these are the main areas, which allowed the 501  Original Jeans to achieve a competitive advantage over the competitors.