Racism is still a problem within our society today, and many ethnic minorities face inequalities in many areas, including education, housing, and employment. Ethnic minorities are concentrated into certain areas of the job market, such as manufacture and communication (Brown, 1992), are most likely to be the victims of assault (Abercrombie et al, 1994), and recent surveys have shown that racist ideas still exist in society. This can be seen in a survey, carried out in 1993, that asked a white sample whether they agreed or disagreed with the statement: 'Immigration has enriched the quality of life in Britain' and nearly half of the sample disagreed (Abercrombie et al, 1994, p255).
This shows that even though racism is illegal, people still hold racist ideas.  In this essay I will discuss the reasons why racism still exists in modern Britain, and sustain the view that although racism is now illegal, it is still a strong force in today's society, a view further developed in the work of Miles (1989).
Initially I will look at what racism is; it can be defined as an ideology which categorises people as inferior according to their race (Beckett, 2005). It is expressed through actions, beliefs and behaviours and these actions and behaviours are based on the idea that one race is superior, and those of other races are inferior. Racism is reflected in structures and processes in society; for example the legal system, which affects housing, employment and education (Fenton, 1998). Racism works to exclude non-whites from certain areas of society, and by doing so reinforces the idea that non-whites are inferior (Beckett, 2005).
I will now look at why racism still persists in society, and the first explanation I will consider is culture. Racist beliefs are part of a legacy of both the slave trade and colonialism as racial categorisation played a large part in the justification of both periods. The idea that humankind was split into different races and that certain races, usually white British, were superior was strong at the time, and reinforced to justify slavery and imperialism. These ideas have left a strong legacy in coloniser societies today (Fenton, 1999). Europeans constructed themselves as the representatives of superior civilisation, and in doing so also constructed those from other countries as the 'Other', a group of people who were uncivilised, and therefore inferior to the West, an idea that was reinforced through literature, as many travellers at the time focused on the abnormal characteristics of the 'Other', and helped construct the idea that they were barbaric and uncivilised (Miles, 1989). Characteristics such as cannibalism and the degradation of women were picked out as features that made those from the colonised states racially inferior, and uncivilised, and reinforced the idea that a racialist hierarchy existed that placed those from the West at the top. By defining people from these countries as the 'Other' they were automatically excluded from the society of the West (Miles, 1989).
Although this construction is no longer as prevalent in society, it has impacted on racism in society today. Images and ideas that were associated with the 'Other', for example the veil in Islam, are still around today, and the racial ideas that were leant to these images still exist. There is also the idea that White Europeans wished to continue their superiority over colonised societies, so sustained the ideas associated with the inferior 'Other' in order to maintain it (Fenton, 1999). It can also be argued that racism persists through culture due to the ideas of nationalism. Nationalism is a very popular discourse in contemporary society, as it was during the period of colonialisation, and the two are very closely linked, with ideas of nationalism often associated with both the ideology and actions of racism (Fenton, 1999).
Constructions of difference between 'Us' and 'Them', the West and the colonised countries ensure that the ideas of racialism still continue (Fenton, 1999). As well as the culture of the West ensuring that racism is still present in our society there are now economic implications.
The racism apparent at the time of colonialisation has been reinforced through the labour market. During this period the racial ideas were put into practice in the economy as those constructed as the 'Other' were exploited through the trade links established with the colonies, by those in power (Miles, 1989) showing that racialism has been imbedded into the economy since before capitalism. However since the emergence of capitalism these racist ideas have been used to support the capitalist market. Capitalists have ensured that ethnic minorities are viewed as suitable only for menial jobs, as they can easily exploit them, and this has reinforced the idea that race determines your skills and abilities, therefore causing racism to be imbedded within the capitalist market (Fenton, 1999). Castles and Kosack have argued that capitalism requires a 'reserve army of labour' to ensure the successful continuation of the economic production along capitalist values, and that ethnic minorities provide this army (Procter, Lecture notes, 2004). However by constructing ethnic minorities as a reserve army of labour racist beliefs are reinforced, as they are viewed as both inferior and only suitable for inferior jobs, but also as a threat to the white workers, creating a sense of racism in white workers.
Overall racism has been an integral part of the economy since the advent of capitalism, and it has been used to divide people to support and exploit the capitalist market. My final explanation for the continued existence of racism is political.
There have been a number of policies since the Second World War that have discriminated against non-whites, but also introduced the idea that they pose a threat to the British way of life. In 1948 the Nationality Act was introduced which designated Britain a 'white' country. This confirmed the 'white' status of Britain, as those who were not from 'white' countries were excluded from the nation (Solomos, 1989). This has been reinforced since the 1950s, as Margaret Thatcher stated in parliamentary debates and speeches that immigrants were taking away jobs and benefits from the 'true' British people, and through this construction immigrants became a problem to be solved (Solomos, 1989).
This construction of immigrants as a problem continued throughout out the 1960s, and in 1962 the Commonwealth Immigrants Act was introduced, which placed restrictions on the number of black immigrants entering the country (Solomos, 1989). By the 1970s legislation had been bought in which controlled the entry of non-white immigrants through a voucher system, giving the government control over who entered the country, and what work they could do following their entry (Brown, 1992). This political racism persisted after 1979, with Margaret Thatcher again emphasising the danger to British society that immigrants pose (Solomos, 1989), and these ideas can still be seen today, with the current clamp-down on the number of asylum seekers entering the country.
This shows that the political parties have continued to view migrants as a problem, and this links to racism as non-whites are associated with these ideas.
In conclusion racism, which can be defined as an ideology which categorises people as inferior according to their race, and is put into practice through many policies and actions, which seek to exclude non-whites from many areas of society, can still be seen in today's society. There are three reasons for this. Firstly the culture of colonialism and the belief that the 'Other' is inferior is still apparent in our society today. Secondly these beliefs are reinforced through the economy, as capitalism exploits ethnic minorities, and ensures that they are viewed as less skilled, and finally racism is embedded in our political system through the policies of political parties and the links they make between non-white immigrants and social problems. All of these processes work together in contemporary society to ensure that racism still continues, and non-whites are excluded.