Official statistics are those produced by either the state, or by one of its agencies. There has been a huge increase in the number of official statistics since the Central Statistics Office was set up in 1941, and now large quantities of statistics are produced on a variety of different topics, for example income, housing and population. Although they are widely used there are many limitations of the use official statistics in sociology.
The positivist approach, as Baran and Chu claim, argue that sociology is based on replicable measurements and valid theories, and official statistics support this (Baran and Chu, cited in May, 1997). This is known as the internal school of thought with regards to official statistics.
The most commonly expressed limitation of the use of official statistics in sociology is due to the issues of reliability and validity of the results. Traditional positivists believe that sociology should use the scientific method, and Aristotle's 'true measures', to collect data which can later be analysed to draw conclusions (May, 1997). The main problem with official statistics is however, that they go through many processes of decision making before the final results are even produced. These decisions, and the different ways in which people can interpret concepts can have a huge effect on the actual results of the statistics.
The first problem is that of the definition of concept, and can cause problems with the reliability of the statistics. Different people define concepts in different ways so this alters the reliability of the study, and also means that readers may interpret the statistics in a different way to that which they were intended (Hindess, 1973, Shipman, 1973, May, 1997). Hindess points out that if concepts are defined differently it can have a huge result on the statistics (Hindess, 1973, cited in Irvine et al, 1979), and in
The next problem is linked to validity. Official statistics go through a long process of decision making before the final result is reached (Hindess, 1973, May, 1997), even down to what methodology is used, and this process can alter the results greatly. In The first decision in the process here is that of what is a crime in terms of the law. This would have a huge impact on crime statistics, for example if marital rape was not illegal then the crime statistics of rape would be very different. The second decision is made by the victim of the crime; whether to report it or not, which means that the formation of official statistics is not just influenced by those composing them, but also by decisions made by those involved in the actual area (May, 1997).
Human judgement is a key factor in this criticism, but as the decision process shows it is not just the judgement of those composing the statistics that is involved (Hindess, 1973). This means that as the process continues the statistics become further distorted as different people's views and decisions become involved. This idea can be illustrated using the example of suicide. The official statistics produced on this topic are not only influenced by those collating the statistics, but also by those determining the causes of death. This can be seen by the fact that in the past Catholic priests did not like to categorise the cause of a death as 'suicide', so the term 'natural cause' would have been used instead, resulting in a very different set of statistics in the end. Cicourel also supports this idea; however he takes it one step further by saying that these decisions are influenced by people's background experiences (Cicourel, cited in Hindess, 1973). This means that even if two people from the same organisation tried to collect the same results there would be complications as they have had different experiences.
Another issue linked to these limitations of official statistics in Sociology comes from the radical school of thought.
According to them the main limitation of official statistics is that they only paint a thin picture of what is happening in society, and are only useful for examining the state and those in power.
The fact that the statistics can be the state's tool also means that problems with reliability and validity can arise as those with power are likely to choose a method that produces the most favourable outcomes (May, 1997). Informants may also be less likely to provide accurate information if they believed that the state was using it, something which could cause problems as statistics depend heavily on accurate responses (May, 1997). This view of official statistics paints a very different picture to that of the posivitists as instead of just having problems with reliability and validity, the methodology and decision making processing involved in the production of the statistics actually make us question the veracity of the results, rather than just the process.
This makes it very hard for sociologists to gain an understanding of the difference classes at this time. This shows how statistics can actually present a very one sided view of society, and the problems that arise from this (Hindess, 1973; Irvine and Miles, 1979) mean that the uses of official statistics in sociology are limited. To conclude sociologists should be careful when interpreting official statistics, and view them with caution. The internal school of thought claims that the main problems arise from the issues of reliability and validity, so say that if sociologists carefully considered the different definitions applied and the process of decision making they could present a more realistic picture of society.
He also suggests that in some cases official statistics are preferable to sociological research as they are collected using standardised procedures with the same methodology, so this minimises errors with reliability and validity (May, 1997).
Overall, according to the posivitists the main limitations of official statistics arise from the issues of reliability and validity, however they feel that in many cases these limitations are overcome by careful planning, so argue that sociologists should use official statistics. Radicals on the other hand, believe that official statistics are a construction of the state, and this means that although they are useful for examining the state and its interests they do not provide a realistic picture of society.
I feel sociologists should use official statistics especially when examining those with power, or exploring the state, however they should treat official statistics produced on other topics with care, and be aware of the process of decision making and methodology that occurs before the statistics are finally produced.