At the eve of the Versailles conference, promoters of the Polish cause immediately realised the international precariousness of their aims to forge the rebirth of an independent Polish state. Moving with caution, Pi It was only the realisation of Soviet hostility toward their new western neighbour that forced the antagonistic political forces to work together in a somewhat efficient war cabinet, though even then with the greatest difficulty and resentment. It was immediately recognised as 'a monument to anti- Pi The seed was thus planted for Pi While the direct cause for Pi
The Polish independence movement had not only internal tensions to combat. There was no significant outside support for the whish of a reborn Polish state, causing the Pi On the one hand, internal divisions and ethnic differences had been a traditional part of the Polish state since the middle ages; on the other hand, the ongoing World War created a totally new level of crisis. Traditionally divided along religious denominational lines, the population of partitioned Poland had almost unreservedly supported the Pi Nevertheless, the war had exposed the deep-rooted divisions amongst the population. The Roman Catholic Church became a strong promotor of national unity among the Poles. As such, it was vital in the struggle of Poles for independence, for the Church provided the necessary moral base for a common cause against the foreign occupier. Especially the Peasant party, who had since 1893 promoted their own vision of a 'Christian democracy', pinned great hopes on its strong link with the Church. This showed that, at least religiously speaking, the Commonwealth could establish a relatively unified stance to fight the oppressors and gain independence.  On the other hand, shear numbers hindered any attempt to promote national unity.
National unity was far to be sought. The dominion claimed by Poland included vast numbers of minorities with loyalties elsewhere. Of twenty-seven million inhabitants not even 70 per cent were Polish, while 14.3 per cent were of other Slavic decent and 7.8 per cent of the population were Jewish, The same went for the small German minority of 3.9 per cent, whom, by conducing themselves 'in manner that was at once provocative and calculated to give notice that it regarded its status in Poland, and Poland herself, as temporary', A long struggle between Poland and her minorities persisted throughout the While it has been noted that '[n]othing the Poles did was ever right, as far as [the Jews] were concerned', On the contrary, when Poland's first president, Gabriel Narutowicz, came to be elected with support of the bloc of minority parties, he was murdered within days after his election by the Sejm. Despite the
The volatile situation in the newly formed state that Poland was not only threatened from the outside, but from the within. An ever-growing antagonism between the Left and the National Democrats culminated in an indifferent atmosphere, while '[e]very party, even the most extreme, resented the dictation of the other' and 'had the greatest difficulty in meeting and cooperating'.
The eastern border was saliently disputed with Soviet Russia. Although 'there was not to be a change in the existing boundaries of the states which emerged between the Two World Wars', Pi As periodical diplomatic bickering between the two states continued, With Bolshevik plans to 'abolish the powers of government in Poland', such a determined force in need of recognition quickly gained ground at the expense of Pi Even when direct violence and campaigns of disruption diminished, incidents of infiltration of Soviet agents on Polish territory continued in the next decades.
Additional to internal problems, came the issue of Poland's national security. Weimar Germany continued a revisionist policy of regaining its former Prussian areas and southeastern Silesia from Poland.
Facing both internal dilemmas and the problem of external security, Polish leaders attempted to unify the body politic in a number of ways; yet, discontent with the government of the Pi The National Democrats, thus, often sought to suppress their opposition to their rule; legal opportunities existed for them to do so, and they used them fully: they were able to increase or reduce the size of the Sejm, the effect being 'that no government presented by the opposition [...] could secure a majority', This, however, caused the National Democrats to stand alone, while an extraordinary large amount of votes were casted on the no-vote option.
The exigent situation that Poland was in did not go unnoticed. Pi Much of the PPS-cadre, frustrated with years of ineffective government and
political inertia, were to some degree ready to compromise on their ultimate goals for an independent Poland. On the other hand, the militaristic National Democratic faction was still a major force to deal with. With an extensive preparation they were able to take control of the Sejm in 1923 and 'concentrate all police, judicial, and administrative power into their own hands'. This tendency of unilateral action was internationally controversial and would gain Poland little sympathy.
The main problem that had to be addressed, however, was how to survive and, maybe more-so, how to 'forge an effective nation',  In the aftermath of the collapse of the Pi As a result of the never-ending infighting between the different factions, Pi Taking over as President of Poland in 1926, Piłsudski thus seized the opportunity to re-establish a functioning constitution without resistance of a majority in parliament. He strongly believed in the need for a strong nation-state where the independence and sovereignty of the republic would be upheld.
By carrying out a While initially hesitant, the This, however, had detrimental effects on the democratic institutions and increasingly alienated many parts of society from his government. Being insufficiently successful in curbing further economic regression into the 1930s and failing to integrate increasingly militant groups of minorities,