It is imperative to inquire into the assumption of the above question by first examining the basis by which the Holocaust should be memorialised. Should the Holocaust be memorialised on the basis of its uniqueness, as some historians have been fast to claim? If the Holocaust was truly so unique, does it not preclude the same event from ever happening again? So why is there this supposed need to commemorate for remembrance? What does one aim to achieve by commemorating it? The above questions become even more pressing with the emergence of the Holocaust Industry. Is it not ironic that the proliferation of monuments comes only in the later half of the twentieth century when the generation of survivors had largely perished? Perhaps it is because of the passing of private, living memory of the Holocaust that a vicarious and surrogate public, fixed interpretation of the past is promoted. 'Collective memory, it would seem, begins where the individual memories of a group cease, along with its members, to exist." Or maybe it is precisely because so many decades have passed from the event that people now dare to look back at their past, and that 'the further events of World War Two recede into time, the more prominent its memorials become." The flourishing of memorial politics in France, Germany, Israel and America do perhaps lend this question a certain direction. In places such as Germany and France where the Jews were persecuted, the upsurge of a need to know the past was perhaps a reaction against the code of silence and the 'absolute negation of the black years ( Building memorials was therefore seen as safeguarding the memory of the Holocaust against the cover-up of the State. Memorialisation however, is a double-edged sword, and the late historian Martin Broszat cautioned that monuments may not remember events as to bury them beneath layers of national myths and explanations. Hence, as cultural reifications, monuments coarsen historical understanding as much as they generate it.