Until the twentieth century, memorials had a very definite form and that is the realist mode. Memorials should use artistic renderings of the historical event, and should display the veracity of the death or suffering shall mourners receive to believe and share the sense of mourning. This mode of memorialising is effective in evoking vivid memory and reinforcement of identity among the descendants of victims. The masterpiece of the realist mode is the Yad Vashem memorial in Jerusalem. The combination of visible and tactile artefacts, and the deliberate, purposeful arrangement of the stars of David and Axis flags, create such an atmosphere of mourning and shared responsibility in the visitor that walking through the halls of Yad Vashem can be said to be an 'experience of national reunification through memory." In contrast, the abstracted mode of memorials found in America and developed in Israel involve sculptures and wall inscriptions. Such memorials are not confined to art museums and parks, but can also be found within churches, synagogues and museums. These abstract forms do not possess any realistic, representational value, and hence, can serve as 'a site to imagine within the knowing imagination what is not engraved on the wall, what cannot be seen in its physical form." The Holocaust memorial in Berlin is an excellent example of this. It stands upon a platform elevated above the bank of river Spree, and 'its oblique plane of slabs, inscribed with names and supported by small stone steles, call forth a response viscerally rather than intellectually, with the magnetism of the site and through the seemingly random pattern of its steles and pathways.' Abstract memorials thus serve to bridge the deep chasm between the generations and subvert memory beyond the realm of the discursive, hence, it might be said that 'abstraction facilitates memory no less greatly than literal representation does." Abstract forms have been gaining popularity due to their abstractness as some condemn realist memorials as too confrontational, and thereby effectively distracting from the primary task of memory. A contentious issue regarding memory of the Holocaust is further explored in the debate surrounding the 'Jews only' memorial.