The 'luxury debates' typically focus on the conflicting views between those who sought to rescue 'luxury' from its tarnished reputation, and those who vehemently opposed 'luxury'. A notable example was the Scottish Enlightenment theorist David Hume's 'Defence of Luxury' which sought to "rehabilitate the traditional’", and to challenge received prejudice by refuting the link between luxury and decay. Hume praised the "effects of luxury in Melting down the Barbarity and Rudeness of premature ages, in raising the Manners of Men and advancing Refinement and Civility" Conversely, Jean Jacques Rousseau's Discourse on the Arts and Sciences had as its remit, not only to deliver ‘luxury’ from its ‘unjust stigma of immorality’, but of course in opposition to Hume, Rousseau is asking “what moral benefit could result from the advancement of the arts and sciences”. This moral dimension of 'luxury' was perhaps most clearly articulated in Rousseau's Discourse on Inequality where he cautioned that: "it is in luxury that the division of ranks originates, and from luxury spring all the modes of pride and servitude." Though Rousseau's verdict of 'luxury' is much harsher than Hume's, both were of the same era, and their views are indicative of the intellectual divide between the 'moderate' and 'radical' aspects of luxury. Rexford Tugwell, in his book The Industrial Order comments on the differences between the two groups, and remarks that, "the moderate, or conservatives, of whom Hume was one, were willing to contemplate the cultivation of some luxury-but only a luxury of good taste and only after a greater equity of economic resources had been achieved." On the other hand, the radicals, to which Rousseau belongs: "were convinced that all luxury, regardless of taste, be it good or bad, represented a waste of the surplus produced by an economy and consequently delayed the achievement of an equitable distribution of resources." This divide has its roots in the classical debates which emanated from Plato (through Hobbes, through Mandeville and then finally in Rousseau and Hume) these debates often draw upon the contrast between ‘Old luxury’ and ‘New Luxury’. And it is upon the ‘Old Luxury’ that the radicals lay the blame on the 'follies of luxury' which have already been alluded to: "such Vices as extravagance, profusion, and a passion for ostentatious show, have universally disgraced the luxurious..." (Mandeville). Mandeville does not oppose extravagance in itself, but he is highly critical of luxury that is not tasteful, of showiness that serves no purpose but to vanity.  This distinction also eventually led to a discernable divide in what 'luxury' represented; for the radicals 'luxury' seemed to connote these aforementioned 'follies' and moral corruption, while for the moderate 'luxury' often stood for refinement, the appreciation of the fine arts, distinction, grace and naturalness. Herein lies an interesting theme of the luxury debates, which links gender to 'luxury' and its perception: The 'Old Luxury', the 'barbarism of luxury', was invariably ascribed to the female gender; women doted on luxury goods and were "irresistibly drawn to all kinds of artificial beauty and attraction"; axtibr snd the poise, which agreed with the Aristotelian conception of the role of women (and slaves)-as the playthings of men Indeed, the perception of luxury by Mandeville and Rousseau, seemingly have much to do with "the abject, idle and helpless state of the sex." and so it is clear that much of the "luxury in public" was actually the "ostentatious consumption of beautiful women of royal or noble birth, who flash jewels and silks whenever they appear in public."