Verbal reports can be divided into two branches,those of first person perspectives and of third person perspectives. First person perspectives refer to the data that is provided through self-report such as questionnaires and interviews. This data is often used in discourse analysis, as the focus is mainly on the contribution of language. Third-person perspectives refer to the data provided by observers, who are said to be in a stated of 'multiple surveillance'. Here, an observer may focus on 'facial expressions, posture, voice and the like'. These perspectives may be used in combination, by using first person oral data enriched with third person perspectives, such as recordings of actual conversations, (Coyle, 1995). Qualitative research, which uses verbal reports can make an additional contribution by providing insights into the structure of social behaviour that cannot be grasped through quantitative information. Gee (1995) states 'Even if we could measure souls (something modern psychology cannot do, nor will be able to do) we would still need discourse analysis to be able to 'read' and understand meaning embedded in language,' (as cited in Kemmerer, 1999). This addition contribution to psychology, that discourse analysis generates, can be generally found in the form of the identifications of the values, strategies and understandings of the speakers (Potter & Wetherell, 1987). These aspects of language use can only be gleaned through close analysis of the use of language and hence the use of discourse analysis. The development of discourse analysis has, in part, been founded on theoretical ideas derived from sociology and linguistics. It is closely related to the notion of 'discourse community' which come from the work of Gee (1995, as cited in Kemmerer, 1999), and Dell Hymes (1969). Discourse communities allow for a community to judge, or rather influence the discourse behaviour of its memebers. It is believed that the development and functioning of discourse communities render qualitative research methods essential in the understanding of the functioning of spoken and written language (Coyle, 1995). Qualitative research has raised questions regarding the nature of the scientific approach to inquiry, especially from the more traditional quantitative perspectives (Denzin & Lincoln, 1994, as cited in Merrick, 1993). The question of how investigative approaches, such as discourse analysis, that are qualitative in nature, can be based on scientific premises has, until relatively recently, remained an issue. Potter (1996) suggests that one way of contrasting the methodology of discourse analysis and traditional scientific inquiry is to think of the model of the natural sciences, in which scientific knowledge is gathered from clearly specified anticipated properties, as a confirmatory model, whereas discourse analysis can be thought of in terms of generativity or creativity.