The pervasiveness of consumerism in the late Victorian period as a civilising process did not arise without consequence for the fabric of society. As consumption no longer accounted a 'shameful public indulgence' in the eyes of the middle class, it increasingly was seen as a logical and necessary part in achieving the desired level of refinement and the image of a 'Universal Provider' (McCracken 1990). In this culture of consumption, rather than just an increase in goods exclusively for the benefit of the male ruling class, both men and women now adopted consumption as part of the greater civilising process of the middle class. Whereas the male population quickly fell under the spell of the new cultural artefacts (McCracken 1990: 25), it was the female middle class who was most in need of encouragement and an altered gender ideal. They were allowed and even encouraged to purchase goods. Shopping was not simply a matter of convenience, it actually 'structured responsibilities in the private realm and schemas of public display' (Rappaport 1996:74). Shopping was no longer seen as the mere purchase of materials, but generally as an 'exercise of taste' (Rappaport 1996:69), lending a great importance to 'daily gestures of appreciation and rejection' (Rappaport 1996:67). Women were encouraged to gratify themselves in a 'ravenous', materialistic way, expanding beyond the home and family (Rappaport 1996:96). Whereas traditionally, femininity for middle class women was characterised by qualities such as 'selflessness, gentleness and intellect' (Rappaport 1996:67), this new form of consumption created a new kind of femininity which, rather than being centred around the household, transformed these qualities into 'matching handbags with outfits' and the decoration of one's home (McCracken 1990:19). Shopping was also used and rethought as a way of communication; where signs among the middle class of various kinds of 'taste and knowledge' (Rappaport 1996:70) were achieved and exchanged (McCracken 1990).