The writing of Simmel on the discipline of sociology is characterised by a desire to reduce the study of society to its essence. Instead of viewing society as Durkheim did, that is, as a generic force working externally of the individual and reifying itself through organisational structures and artefacts, Simmel was rather concerned with giving a 'serious [...]analysis of the social bond' (Nisbit 1959: 479), which can be described as the reciprocally working relation between two or more social actors. He denounced the view that a society "as such" could exist outside individuals (Simmel 1971a: 27), preferring to build a sociological system from the individual's standpoint. In the first place, Simmel represented social interaction as the dynamic attempt to reconcile the opposite drives within each human being - 'for example, the individual and the group, the need for conformity and for individuation, the need for stability and for flexibility' (Abel 1959: 478). Despite the theoretical character of these opposites, Simmel believed all "forms-of-sociation" are to some extent conditioned by the tension between them. Secondly, Simmel sought to separate the The form thereby attains a certain "objective" quality, acting as a generally discernable trait in a variety of social circumstances. As an illustration of this position, Simmel considered the phenomenon of secrecy to be a social form which could, therefore, not be judged as such, as it 'stands in neutrality above the value functions of its content' (Simmel 1950: 331). Furthermore, the greater the number of links through sociation, the more the social sphere becomes "society".
Simmel announced the method proposed by him as sociological in the fullest sense, saying that 'when each individual may be brought into a reciprocal relation to the form which is the distinctive and general character of the association, the problem of sociology takes on an aspect of the utmost importance' (Simmel 1971a: 24). This essay will aim to locate the position of Simmel on the subject of sociology, and focus upon the way Simmel substantiates and applies the concept of "forms-of-sociation" as a tool for sociological studies. It will argue in conclusion that Simmel succeeds, to an extent, in providing us with a tool to analyse microsocial relations, however has difficulties dealing with more impersonal social structures.
Simmel's writing on the discipline of sociology, then, is characterised by an attempt to bring about a 'serious [...]analysis of the social bond' (Nisbit 1959: 479). Rather than viewing society as an external, generic force reifying itself through organisational structures and artefacts, Simmel proposed that the social sphere ought to be viewed primarily from the individual's standpoint. To this end, he proposed that the understanding of a society should be built upon the recognition of the tension between various opposites, such as the individual and the collective, or stability and flexibility. Simmel believed that the tension between these opposites creates underlying forms-of-sociation, which act as generally discernable traits in a variety of social circumstances. He further argued that the greater the number of links through sociation, the more the social sphere becomes "society".
The work of Simmel on the discipline of sociology is an attempt to construct a sociological system based on the individual standpoint. Simmel argued that society is composed of 'forms-of-sociation' (Simmel 1971a: 22), which are a reciprocal relation between two or more social actors, essentially based on a tension between opposite drives within each individual actor. This separation of form and content gave Simmel a useful tool to understand the intricacy of social interaction between individuals. Furthermore, Simmel has been criticised for his strict reductionism and focus on the microsocial aspects of social interaction, leaving out the external social force of society over the individual. Nevertheless, his work is important in that it stresses the "humanistic coefficient" of social interaction, and provides an immediacy to the sociology of everyday interactions.
The separation of form and content automatically assumes the individual as the basis for a social interaction. It thereby recognises the role of psychology in determining the origins of social behaviour (Simmel 1971a). Simmel was, however, much concerned with defining the proper territory of sociology, arguing that 'we are not interested in the psychological processes that occur in each of the two individuals but in their subsumption under the categories of union and discord' (Simmel 1971a: 34). All we can properly and legitimately call society is 'a mode of existence which concretely expresses itself in the reciprocal relations of human beings' (Abel 1959: 475). The social grid of forms-of-sociation owes to Kant's virtue ethics in that it separates intention from action (Craib 1997: 56); Simmel, however, was not concerned with adding a value judgment but argued that the sociologist should solely attempt to determine the "grammar" of society by example.
Simmel's writing on the subject of sociology, which focus on form and content has not been without criticism. Burrow argued that 'the continued emphasis upon the divisive individual and the atomic, superficial, and segmental aspects of sociation, led [Simmel] to neglect [...] problems of larger social integration', and that hence, Simmel's application of social theory to solve societal problems was too limited In the Netherlands, for example, the idealistic philosophy of collective value systems have held a strong position in the social sciences. Furthermore, Simmel's attempt to further atomise society may be seen as a reflection of the nineteenth century context from which his philosophy on society sprang; a time which did not forgive any form of social integration. This must, however, not be taken to imply that Simmel was striving for a certain form of 'individualistic autonomy', as Burrow intimates (1981: 204). As Simmel himself pointed out, 'what binds single elements into an organic whole is not separability into individual elements but the possession of something which unites them in a higher, organic unity' (Simmel 1971a: 32). Simmel, however, was not focussing on the periphery of the word of social forms. He undertook a rigid analysis which, while it effectively overlooks a large section of society, 'nevertheless presents a thoroughly coherent, meaningful and substantial picture of certain aspects of social interaction' (Craib 1997: 56).  The introduction of Simmel's notion of the sociator as the vortex between the form and content in an interaction has been proposed by Craib (1997). Exploring the relational core of multidimensional social action suggests that 'the sociator is, in effect, a web of relationships that is itself continually re-created in the act of social action' (Craib 1997: 56). This implies that the form - namely 'the way in which the relationship is culturally understood and in which the relationship is given behaviourally expression' (Craib 1997: 56) - is the social binding substance in an interaction, or series of interactions. Simmel's ideas can, likewise, be applied to various research techniques, such as survey-research, 'in which the questions frame the situation and the answers indicate how individuals interpret the sociator into which they have been placed' (Craib 1997: 57). This idea can also be found in Sartre's (1944) definition of the 'situation', which "frames" social actors in their various roles.  Simmel's views on sociology, how it ought to be studied and applied, have also been criticised for being too narrow and precise (Abel 1959: 477). This is undoubtedly due to Simmel's exclusive focus on the microsocial, where everything is related to the individual, rather than the society in which the individual is embedded. It implies that although a form may be recognised, it must be inspected as a unit in itself, and can not be related to anOverall, Simmel's writing on the nature of the science of sociology, in its focus on abstraction, has provided a valuable perspective on the social interaction of individuals. His metaphorical view of society as a grammar can be seen as an attempt to, 'unmask under the seemingly meaningless discrepancy of opinion of our contemporaries the rationalization forces that are unceasingly at work and to eliminate them by means of scientific precision' (Simmel 1950: 408). Simmel has open new paths for the student of society, as well as for the student of psychology; his empirical, dynamic, yet strictly moderate and sensible, approach to sociological research has enlarged our understanding of the social, and may, ultimately, furnish us with a greater ability to predict the changes in social patterns. Still, Simmel's views have not been without criticism. His prolific atomisation of society can, as such, not be deemed as an effective tool to create a meaningful general theory of society. Ultimately, Simmel's theorisation of society can be valued in the sense that it places emphasis on the form and content of social relations, and should be seen as a useful and highly interesting tool to use in a variety of contexts. It must, however, not be seen as a substitute for comprehensive and inclusive social studies. ﻿﻿
Another point of criticism that has been brought to the fore, is the way in which sociology, in Simmel's conception, occupies a place merely as the study of the microsocial, which comes out of the distinction between and form and content as the only purely human element in social relations (Abel 1959: 476). It is, furthermore, a point of inconsistency between Simmel's writing on what sociological studies should consist of, and his actual sociological treatises. For example, when Simmel describes the social form "secrecy" as 'a formal means of boasting and of subordinating the others' (Simmel 1950: 332), this definition is much narrower than his further expansion on its role in associations, and the physical-spatial element that secrecy often involves. Hence, it can be said that the Simmel's descriptions of the content often go beyond what he himself characterised as the elements that make up a society. By focussing on the microsocial element of society, Simmel failed to appropriate the external force of society over the individual, arguing, contrarily to Durkheim, that 'with every growth of new synthesising phenomena [...], the same group becomes "more society" than it was before' (Simmel 1971a: 27); that is - society is the sum-total of all microsocial interaction.
The writing of Simmel on the discipline of sociology is characterised by a desire to reduce the study of society to its essence. Instead of viewing society as Durkheim did, that is, as a generic force working externally of the individual and reifying itself through organisational structures and artefacts, Simmel was rather concerned with giving a 'serious [...]analysis of the social bond' (Nisbit 1959: 479), which can be described as the reciprocally working relations between two or more social actors. He denounced the view that a society "as such" could exist outside individuals (Simmel 1971a: 27), preferring to build a sociological system from the individual's standpoint. In the first place, Simmel represented social interaction as the dynamic attempt to reconcile the opposite drives within each human being - 'for example, the individual and the group, the need for conformity and for individuation, the need for stability and for flexibility' (Abel 1959: 478). Despite the theoretical character of these opposites, Simmel believed all "forms-of-sociation" are to some extent conditioned by the tension between them. Secondly, Simmel sought to separate the social form, which thereby attains a certain "objective" quality, from the individual content that it may contain, acting as a generally discernable trait in a variety of social circumstances. As an illustration of this position, Simmel considered the phenomenon of secrecy to be a social form which could, therefore, not be judged as such, as it 'stands in neutrality above the value functions of its content' (Simmel 1950: 331). Furthermore, the greater the number of links through sociation, the more the social sphere becomes "society".
In his work on The Metropolis and Mental Life (1900/1971), Simmel attempted to delineate the effect of modern life on an individual. Hereafter, he argued for the presence of 'a new individualistic spirit' (Vidler 1991: 34), caused by the diminished need for interaction between people in the city. The individual is, as noted before, the starting level for any social formation. It is the will of two or more individuals that define what relation takes place and, as said, 'the form and the content of these relations are not the same thing: the content makes it, while the form expresses it' (Simmel 1971a: 28). Hence, Simmel argued that the complex modern life encourages a seclusion of individuals, which in turn results in an increase of the "thing" society. 'By dint of lacking mutual relations and intercourse with one another [-] individuals grow out of the accustomed courses of feeling and action' (Simmel 1971a: 20), he wrote, while maintaining that '[t]he sole purpose of these forms is to give the whole an objective appearance, which is not disfigurable by its varying contents' (Simmel 1971a: 26).
That said, Simmel's fundamental aim in view of this model of the metropolis was to arrive at a definition of the 'social forms' that may be associated with it, describing them as a specific approach to 'the nexus of things social', which for him consists of the 'intellectual operations of the individual mind' (Simmel 1971b: 328). A 'philosophically neutral' (Simmel 1971b: 329) approach to social forms hence emerges from his writing on the metropolis in the sense that one needs to take away 'the materials of the social sciences from their practical materiality in order to treat them as factors of abstract logic' (Simmel 1971b: 333); that is, form and content must be separated, and the content of each form must be analysed as a single concept from within the social sphere. Simmel explicitly sided with the method of abstracting the content from the recurrences of experiences (Simmel 1971b: 333), which lead him to speak of the '"formal" conditions of a "socially" significant attitude' (Simmel 1971b: 334).
The reductionist approach developed by Simmel still remains subject to a whole array of criticism. Indeed it seems too arbitrary to start an analysis of society with such an abstract concept divorced from any empirical content. Moreover, his focus on the microsocial lacks a framework to explain the big forms such as the state or the market. Simmel's theory may then lack a little bit in explanative strength, especially when one wants to study forms-of-sociation that range wider than merely small-scale communities.
In the examination of Simmel's appropriateness of forms as a tool for sociology, the term must, therefore, not be seen to be equivalent of social laws or the like, but should be regarded as a tool for interpretation of case studies. Moreover, Simmel's using abstraction in order to understand the the social sphere recognised the importance of the dynamics of all different forms-of-sociation as a sum-total of the individual's strength of will and the values held by each individual.
The strength of Simmel's works lies in his concept of forms-of-sociation, which may be used to examine sociological phenomena from a distanced yet deep angle. These forms can then be seen as the inevitably interactive element of deliberately exercised and unintentional forms-of-sociation between two or more social actors that work in tandem on the social level. Simmel further claims that the primary focus of this 'grammatical' approach to society should be placed upon 'the psychological element in the relation in so far as it has a necessary function in the formation of social forms' (Simmel 1971a: 34). This allows for a democratic, interactive, and primarily humanising approach to the study of society as a collection of individuals, which transcends the traditional Durkheimian approach of a static social system and its 'primary and secondary forces' (Durkheim 1955).
This approach to sociology, however, brings up a number of problems which Simmel sought to address by simply placing all socio-historical biases and influences This brings about an antagonism in Simmel's system of thought, in that it reveals a disparity between the Especially more continuous, bigger forms of organisation have a greater sense of impersonality to them, making the underlying form (essentially a drive springing from individual actors) hard to define and ambiguous. The separation of form and content is thus a very useful too in the study of microsocial relations, but cannot be seen to contend any notion of a "society in its entirety".