This began in 1920, when Floyd Allport coined the term social facilitation. He conducted an experiment based on one of Triplett's earlier studies, and noted that children reeled in a fishing line more quickly when they were in a pairs condition than in an individual condition. Social facilitation focuses on the impact of social presence on individual performance (Aiello and Douthitt, 2001), and is one of the most effects most expounded when such effects occur in an individuals behaviour. Allport (1920) hypothesised that competition between people energises and improves performance, especially in motor tasks. Since then, Zajonc's drive theory (1965) has emerged as one of the most popular explanations for behaviour, second only to the work of Allport (1920) and Triplett (1898). The theory suggests that the mere presence of others gives rise to instinctive arousal, which motivates performance and behaviour (Zajonc, 1965). This influential theory proposed that other people increase the general drive and activation level of the actor (Strauss, 2002). The concept of a mere presence effect was studied further, suggesting that individuals are affected even when an audience is only physically present, and is passive and unresponsive (Robinson-Staveley and Cooper, 1990; Schmitt, Gilovich, Goore and Joseph, 1986), and that the effect is more pronounced if the audience turns out to be incidental rather than if the participants are aware of its presence (Markus, 1978). The research of Guerin (1986), proposes that an element of self-presentation is involved when the individual is placed in a social context. He cites this as the main concern in individual performance. Evidence from Geen and Gange (1977), Zajonc, Wolosin, Wolosin and Loh, (1970) and Seta, Paulus, and Schkade (1976), shows that conservation of risk taking increased when participants perceived themselves to be in small groups than when they were alone. This illustrates the natural inhibition which arises from contact with others.