For a more detailed look at the engine, I will look at the carburettor. A carburettor mixes the air and fuel into an emulsified form, which can then be sucked into the combustion chamber. Its basic form comprises a tube with a narrow passage known as the choke tube (or venturi), which contains a jet through which fuel can flow. As the engine sucks in mixture, it draws air through the carburettor and venturi. As the air is sucked in, it increases velocity inside the choke tube. A situation then occurs where air cannot get through the venturi in the same quantity as it can the rest of the carburettor/inlet manifold. This decreases pressure in the venturi; thereby fuel is sucked in as the pressure is lower than that at the other end of the fuel-line. The fuel is sprayed into the venturi through a jet in a fine mist. This mist evaporates into the air. Just after the choke tube is a butterfly valve (throttle) which can be varied between opened and shut to regulate the pressure (i.e. amount) of fuel/air mixture allowed into the combustion chamber to make the engine run faster (more mixture can be burned: bigger explosion), or slower. Similarly, just before the choke tube is another butterfly valve called the choke tube. This again can be manually opened and closed to allow more or less air through. As you close the valve, pressure in the choke tube decreases even further at the set throttle, and so more fuel is added to the air to enrich the mixture. This is particularly desirable when the engine is cold, as you don't get such a lean burn. The component is made from metal - probable stainless steel or a light alloy to prevent corrosion externally in damp conditions. Because of the nature of the fuel used, there will be little internal corrosion. The surface will have to be made as smooth as possible to limit the effect of friction between the mixture and the carb. tube, which could make the fuel condense. This is particularly true with regards to the butterfly valves, which look to be made of brass to limit this effect further. The carburettor was probably case by pouring molten metal into a die and leaving it to cool and set hard. The product was probably then taken out of the die and any sand (dependant on material) from the fuel/airways removed by air blasting. The components that make up the butterfly valve were made separately. Indeed the pivot shaft for the butterflies may have been extruded from molten metal. There would had been several carburettor bodies done in one casting to save energy cost and time. The whole thing would then be assembles on a production line on a continuous or mass scale. To estimate air pressures and speeds in the carburettor tube and the choke tube, one might look at how quickly the cylinder is drawing in air and relate this to the diameters of the tubes to see how much air will be drawn in. Similarly when the choke is closed we can see how much air could get in compared to the rate of the cylinder drawing air to calculate the vacuum in the choke tube.