In turn, Czechoslovakia had been under German occupation since March 1939. Communists there enjoyed by far less popular favour than in other countries. The Czech National Socialist party had been part of the government before the German occupation and only when the Red Army neared the Czech borders would the communists, helped by the Soviet-sponsored Czech National Council, proclaim a Committee of National Liberation in April 1945.  The election of [Edvard] Benes as president promised the establishment of a democratic system of government. Although it was Stalin's hope that the Czechoslovak government would become increasingly communist, the modernising Benes, in the words of Miko Communists were only allowed to join the government towards the end, and Benes' policy towards the party was that of the 'brotherhood of brotherhoods'. As a result, the Czechoslovak Communist Party, whom the Red Army had admitted to the National Council in much the same manner as in Poland, received relatively few government positions. However, this was shortly to change, as will become clear after a look at the economic slavery imposed by the Soviet Union. In 1945, Czechoslovakia became the unwilling victim of aggressive industrialisation programmes resembling those of the Soviet Union, Miko Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia were not, however, the only Eastern European countries which had to undergo drastic changes at the end of hostilities. In Bulgaria, elections by universal suffrage had taken place in October 1944, and the communist-dominated 'Fatherlands Front' won the majority of the votes. Nonetheless, its leader, I. M. Bulgarov, still insisted on assuming power as a member of a coalition government. Miko Nevertheless, the combination of politico-economic restrictions imposed by the Red Army und Ulbricht's radical political ideas, fuelled by the increasing distrust of the western powers, hastened the breakdown of all non-communist opposition. In East Germany In May 1945, Churchill had resolved to form a neutral, democratic, and independent Czechoslovakia,   The same policy of toleration was implemented in Hungary too. In May 1945 the Budapest government initially postulated its full independence. In February 1945, however, the Soviet Union installed Hungary's first communist leader, M. Rajk, chairman of the Peace Party, as prime minister. Again, the Soviet Union insisted on Soviet advisors in the government, although granting a degree of executive autonomy to the Hungarian government due to its relative lack of any significant recent collaboration with the Third Reich.  The Polish and Yugoslavian cases were somewhat different. Throughout the whole of the Second World War, the Poles were under sole, direct German occupation and, as has been established, were given no chance to influence their own political development. Upon the Red Army's liberation of Poland, the Muscovite-endorsed Lublin committee and the Soviet-backed Polish Committee of National Liberation soon clashed over the nation's future. Miko Despite this, an agreement to pursue a further communisation of Czechoslovakia was yet to be reached during Stalin's visit of Potsdam in July 1945,  The Czech and Slovak nation had already become an unwilling victim of the Soviet Economic Commission which was sent to Czechoslovakia with the mission to summon all mandatory calculations of industrial production in an effort to promote collectivisation the economy was greatly accelerated and the powerful economic foundations of the non-communist parties were soon to be ruined. In April and June, the Slovak Usher-Dog, the Hlinka Guard, Ilko Štembera was released from police custody and allowed to take office again, In the same month, a Slovak communist party (SCKP) was finally announced. Its spokesman, Joseph Stichek, was also successful in a parliamentary motion of no-confidence which led to the restriction of the powers of the cabinet and placed the Slovak National Council more firmly on the path of communisation. The non-communists had soon abandoned the Fatherland Front and whenever they spoke out against the SCKP, they were condemned as 'bourgeois reactionaries'.   In Hungary, though there were elections in 1945 and the pre-war government regained control in the first months of 1945, Miko At the end of the war, Eastern Europe found itself confronted with Stalinism. In a bid to end the historical anomalies of the region once and for all, Stalin maintained his assertive security policy which aimed to shift the Soviet borders closer to the heart of Europe. This dream had been the basis of the 1939 Molotov-Ribbentrop pact, and, after the war, the Soviet Union was even more determined to impose its political influence onto its liberated neighbours.  Partly due to a diplomatic misunderstanding between the east and west, partly due to the totalitarian intentions of the Soviet Union, Stalin perceived the Cold War as a natural continuation of the western policy of containment directed against the Soviet sphere of influence even before the war.   In terms of their actual mode of communisation, Eastern European countries followed different paths in the period after the war. In Poland, the AK were suppressed and contacts with sympathetic politicians in the west were broken. The Polish government-in-exile in London was officially declared redundant,  In Czechoslovakia, a gradual, almost liberal communisation took place,  In the same month, the communists, in dialogue with President Gottwald, had outlined plans for the Prague Manifesto;  In Hungary, too, the communists took control gradually, until in late 1947,   Bulgaria, in juxtaposition, was much more lenient in its incorporation of the communists into the government.  The Yugoslavian case, however, was by far the most ideal for Stalin. Both prior to and during the war, there had been a strong resistance movement and partisan fighters