The first meeting of Marx and Engels in Paris in 1844 marked the starting point of a legendary friendship and cooperation of two thinkers
The meeting of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels in Paris in the summer of 1844 marked the beginning of an enduring friendship and cooperation between two leading political and social thinkers. Marx and his family had come to Paris from Germany after their home country had closed its borders to revolutionary activity. Like Marx, Engels was looking for ways to make a social and political revolution. Soon the two formed a friendship and a mutual admiration and respect for each other's writings and beliefs.
The friendship between the two thinkers resulted in a decisive influence on the development of Marxism. As revolutionaries, Marx and Engels argued that the emancipation of the working class should be achieved by a 'dictatorship of the proletariat'. This implied the single-party rule of a nationalist state authority, and is an aspect of Marxism-Leninism that has often been interpreted as undemocratic. The notion of a revolutionary state was to play a prominent role in the intellectual legacy of Marx and Engels, as became clear in the writings of Lenin and of fellow Bolsheviks.
By the mid-1840s, the spectrum of voices demanding change had drastically expanded. Demands for representative government, democratic rights, and an end to feudal privileges were finding their way through Europe, eventually leading to the European revolution of 1848. In this context, Marx and Engels, in 1846, came to the important conclusion that 'the workers had no country'. As European nations armed themselves for war, Marx and Engels saw the workers' lack of natural rights to determine collective existence as their main weakness. To overcome this obstacle, they wrote: 'The proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains. They have a world to win'. In their minds, the coming revolution had to extend far beyond the political changes of 1848, seeking ultimate emancipation. They determined 'the special mission of the working class: to do away with the old capitalist society saturated or fettered as it is everywhere with conservatism and with injustice – and to lay the foundation for a new society without class antagonisms'.
Marx and Engels became convinced that they had discovered a scientific model of society and its inevitable future. Marx's drive to act upon theory soon brought him into international communist circles. After heated debate at a congress in London in 1847, Marx and Engels were commissioned to write a political programme for the Communist League. Its result, the
In both the early drafts of the Manifesto and even, Marx eventually began to forgo his more abstract ideological definition and investigated the practical aspects of a revolution. 'Let the ruling classes tremble at a Communistic revolution' he wrote in the Manifesto. His position on revolution was one of direct action; 'The emancipation of the working class must be conquered by the working classes themselves. They then merge with the revolutionary proletariat of all other countries in the common struggle for the overthrow of the bourgeoisie'. The role of the government had to be one of bureaucratic management; not, as previously envisioned, one of paternal bureaucracy-style reform.
The French Revolution of 1871 and the Paris Commune of 1871 opened the eyes of Marx and Engels to the importance of immediate action, yet also convinced them of the theoretical deficiencies of a pure democracy to lead to socialism. Marx and Engels thus argued that democracy only partially assured the elimination of class differences; 'The Communards have no ready-made utopias to introduce by decree of the people at one stroke'. Finally, Marx and Engels realised that no revolution could be made to succeed without a strong and dedicated organisation: 'Only the organisation of the proletarians into a class, and consequently into a political party, can turn the first steps of the proletarian movement into a really revolutionary movement'.  Lenin's ideas on the dictatorship of the proletariat and his contribution to a theory of a revolutionary government  With the death of Marx in 1883, a repository of theoretical ideas was left to be filled by his successor. Broadly, Russia was shaken and contemporaries called out for revolutionary leadership to govern. Lenin, alongside other revolutionary contemporaries, answered this desperate call.  Lenin was born in Russia in 1870 and soon became an adherent to the revolutionary ideals of Marx and Engels. Even by the age of twelve, Lenin wrote in a school newspaper of his belief that 'the stronger will always trample over the weaker'. In his twenties, Lenin refined this thought to believe that only a socialist system in which the majority of people would be in control of the government could do justice to the historical struggle between the classes. Thus, like Marx, Lenin assumed that a period of dictatorship of the proletariat would lead society out of its capitalist bondage. The practical implementation of Marxist theories was seen to be likely in the almost autocratic conditions of tsarist Russia.
Lenin believed that a stable and secure society could only be achieved by a revolution from below. 'All talk to the effect of achiev[ing] More prominent among the aims of communist revolution was the overthrow of the 'bourgeois-democratic' state and its replacement by a workers' state. The distinction between the two was strictly formulated by Lenin when he wrote: 'The state is a special organization of force; it is an organization of violence for the suppres[s]ion of some class'. According to Lenin, the workers' state would be made up of 'the dictatorship of the proletariat'. Whilst Lenin emphasised the role of a vanguard of professional revolutionaries, he also preserved some elements of the 'democratic' state, which he saw as indispensible for a successful proletarian revolution. The proclamation of state authority only applied 'until the proletariat, having, as a result of its political superiority gained control of the state, will organise the whole of society in accordance with a single plan, on the basis of the population's free consent'.
Some of Lenin's writing, though, already revealed some of the authoritarian traces that were to characterise the Bolsheviks' policy and the Soviet Union's later political development. Convinced, like Marx, of the inevitability of a proletarian revolution, he remarked: 'I said that there
The speech aroused immediate calls for democracy, triggering Lenin to respond in November 1917 to these demands It was to be a constitution to establish the governmental policies of the Soviet Union. Initially, even Lenin was willing to accept universal suffrage and party representation in the election of a Constituent Assembly. However, with the October revolution, the Constituent Assembly was dissolved in January 1918 against Lenin's will; the Bolsheviks believed the assembly to be detrimental to the working of the Soviet Republic. This initiative underlined the difference between the planning of a revolutionary seizure of power and the subsequent running of a socialist government based on autonomy and representation. The author of the left socialist novel The Last Summer, Alexandra Kollontai wrote in her article 'Theses on Communist Ethics' in 1921: 'The proletariat must learn to create an organized state power defending the interests of the working classes'. This meant, she argued, that it would have to learn to pass laws and to rule. To do this, democracy would be an important tool: the proletariat had to learn to listen to minority opinions, even if it was not always in agreement with them.
In practice, much of Lenin's writing at the dawn of the October revolution appears to excuse the Bolsheviks' grasp for power and subsequent policy. Eventually, Bolshevik rule directly after the revolution proved to be highly undemocratic. In 1918, all political parties that did not support the Bolsheviks were systematically suppressed; 'The negative, the tearing down, can be decreed; the building up, the positive cannot', she argued. According to her, Lenin was standing in the way of a democratic learning process of the proletariat. 'The broadest democracy was needed', otherwise 'socialism will be decreed from behind a few official desks by a dozen intellectuals'.
Nikolai Lenin  When the Bolsheviks, led by Lenin, seized power in the October revolution of 1917, their vision of a truly democratic state and society was replaced by a reality of mass terror and oppression of civil rights and freedom. With the fall of the Soviet Union, the influence of these revolutionary thinkers has been greatly diminished. However, Lenin's ideas on democracy had already been distorted to the point of nullity under the rule of Joseph Stalin.  Stalin inherited the task of holding together a psychologically unhappy Soviet Union. He was determined to force change, through his version of 'building socialism in one country'. Convincing large sections, as Lenin had done, that 'the new society can be built only by the masses, it is the task of a party to prepare and train the masses for this great historic work,' Stalin seemed to have a clear concept of revolution and mass control. However, it quickly became clear that his idea of 'building socialism in one country' was nothing more than a mask for a more autocratic form of government. Stalin's belief that the 'bureaucracy' and bureaucracy's particular approach to problem-solving was authoritative replaced the revolutionary spirit of the October revolution.
It is hard to place Stalin's policy in an unmitigated Marxist light. Despite its rhetoric, the Soviet Union of Stalin appeared to many something other than socialism. The state did not wither away, instead, a status quo of power was developing; one in which all lines came together in Moscow. An elite of scientifically based professional revolutionaries would 'show the way, formulating the program and policies, educating the people, and working out the strategy and tactics'. Stalin's biographer, Deutscher, wrote: 'It has assumed office as a government of the people, by the people and for the people [...][now,] it ceases to be government by the people'. Moreover, they revealed a highly undemocratic and unrepresentative government that stood separate from the masses.
The approximately hundred-year period over which the intellectual and political activity of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin spread has seen the emergence of an immense social and political experiment of revolution and the move toward a communist state. The concept of democracy has over this time been much debated and scrutinised in order to deprive it of its 'bourgeois' elements. However, in the theories of Marx and Engels, there has been too little space left open for a pluralistic approach to state organisation. Communism, or some pure form of democracy within society's organisation has never been achieved.