Simmel's writing on the subject of sociology, which focus on form and content has not been without criticism. Burrow argued that 'the continued emphasis upon the divisive individual and the atomic, superficial, and segmental aspects of sociation, led [Simmel] to neglect [...] problems of larger social integration', and that hence, Simmel's application of social theory to solve societal problems was too limited In the Netherlands, for example, the idealistic philosophy of collective value systems have held a strong position in the social sciences. Furthermore, Simmel's attempt to further atomise society may be seen as a reflection of the nineteenth century context from which his philosophy on society sprang; a time which did not forgive any form of social integration. This must, however, not be taken to imply that Simmel was striving for a certain form of 'individualistic autonomy', as Burrow intimates (1981: 204). As Simmel himself pointed out, 'what binds single elements into an organic whole is not separability into individual elements but the possession of something which unites them in a higher, organic unity' (Simmel 1971a: 32). Simmel, however, was not focussing on the periphery of the word of social forms. He undertook a rigid analysis which, while it effectively overlooks a large section of society, 'nevertheless presents a thoroughly coherent, meaningful and substantial picture of certain aspects of social interaction' (Craib 1997: 56).  The introduction of Simmel's notion of the sociator as the vortex between the form and content in an interaction has been proposed by Craib (1997). Exploring the relational core of multidimensional social action suggests that 'the sociator is, in effect, a web of relationships that is itself continually re-created in the act of social action' (Craib 1997: 56). This implies that the form - namely 'the way in which the relationship is culturally understood and in which the relationship is given behaviourally expression' (Craib 1997: 56) - is the social binding substance in an interaction, or series of interactions. Simmel's ideas can, likewise, be applied to various research techniques, such as survey-research, 'in which the questions frame the situation and the answers indicate how individuals interpret the sociator into which they have been placed' (Craib 1997: 57). This idea can also be found in Sartre's (1944) definition of the 'situation', which "frames" social actors in their various roles.  Simmel's views on sociology, how it ought to be studied and applied, have also been criticised for being too narrow and precise (Abel 1959: 477). This is undoubtedly due to Simmel's exclusive focus on the microsocial, where everything is related to the individual, rather than the society in which the individual is embedded. It implies that although a form may be recognised, it must be inspected as a unit in itself, and can not be related to anOverall, Simmel's writing on the nature of the science of sociology, in its focus on abstraction, has provided a valuable perspective on the social interaction of individuals. His metaphorical view of society as a grammar can be seen as an attempt to, 'unmask under the seemingly meaningless discrepancy of opinion of our contemporaries the rationalization forces that are unceasingly at work and to eliminate them by means of scientific precision' (Simmel 1950: 408). Simmel has open new paths for the student of society, as well as for the student of psychology; his empirical, dynamic, yet strictly moderate and sensible, approach to sociological research has enlarged our understanding of the social, and may, ultimately, furnish us with a greater ability to predict the changes in social patterns. Still, Simmel's views have not been without criticism. His prolific atomisation of society can, as such, not be deemed as an effective tool to create a meaningful general theory of society. Ultimately, Simmel's theorisation of society can be valued in the sense that it places emphasis on the form and content of social relations, and should be seen as a useful and highly interesting tool to use in a variety of contexts. It must, however, not be seen as a substitute for comprehensive and inclusive social studies. ﻿﻿