In his article "The convict code among inmates of a halfway house" (1974), Robert Wieder offers a case-study of the workings of what he calls 'the alleged code of behaviour among hard-core, male, felons', which serves as an indexical interpretative tool for understanding residents' interactions with the staff of a "halfway house". In the essay, Wieder makes an attempt to uncover the workings of a behavioural code which he claims to have been widely accepted by the residents involved in his case-study. Residents, according to Wieder, referred to it when they encountered staff in the facility in order to "tell the code" (Wieder 1974:148). By this, Wieder understands a set of norms of interaction which informed their actions, and which, instead of being explicated, were performed. Thus, the 'convicts described norms of behaviour and relationships in terms of what they do in terms of what a "man" does or does not do, what is proper or improper (Wieder 1974: 151).  The importance that Wieder gives the "code" should be seen as characteristic of the ethnomethodological approach to sociology. This approach contends that 'through our daily negotiations of the many conflicting 'secular' values of contemporary society, and through developing 'standards' or 'lines of conduct' to sanction and guide such conflicts, we become members of significant social groups' (Craib 1992: 104). It, therefore, follows that where societies are placed in precarious, instable situations, an acute sense of meta-social norms obtains. Wieder sees the convict code as part of such an instance, as 'nothing stands so greatly in need of justification as criminal acts' (Wieder 1974: 150). Indeed, constantly facing a "dilemma of aloneness" (Silverman 1972: 174) in the facility, a sense of community was rendered necessary. The convict code offered exactly that: a lexicon of behavioural norms in which the struggle of alienated individuals could be guided, structured and justified.  In the setting of Wieder's case-study, in which inmates occasionally found themselves in interaction with staff and other residents, the convict code possessed the function of both a system of behavioural norms and, simultaneously, an interpretative tool of such norms. This function, Wieder explains, first of all, served as a shield of uncooperativeness when confronted with questions asked by staff: 'talking the code was one form [...] of verbal positioning in order to resist being placed by staff into particular social identities' (Wieder 1974: 156). However, Wieder also finds discrepancies between the actual enactments of the convict code and its stipulations as reported by residents. This he interprets as residents' attempts to deploy the code in order to 'thwart the members' attempts at exercising authority' (Wieder 1974: 157). This situational interpretation of the codes should not be confused with its reference to a more disturbing background of power relations. Wieder recognises that 'the code is always employed as an attendant rationale for challenging institutional authority - as a concrete social device by collective actors to protect collective interests' (Wieder 1974: 164).