The advent of the Solidarity strikes and protests halfway 1980 struck a serious blow at the Polish communist regime. Whilst it provided a powerful response of workers to the repressive character and 'determination [of the Polish regime] to maintain [the political and economic] systems, whatever their human costs and lack of legitimacy', Where from came this powerful articulation of demands, and of 'the most powerful, sophisticated and advanced working-class movement yet seen, certainly in the 'communist' sphere and perhaps anywhere in the world'? Economic and political developments throughout the 1970s united with a blend of national-historical and wider Eastern European economic grievances to prepare the ferment for 'a new generation of protesting workers with a clearly different way of articulating their grievances [as] a strictly Polish phenomenon'.
The prehistory of the Solidarity movement was, most importantly, sparked by an increasing crystallisation of a "class consciousness" within the ranks of the Polish work force, many of whom were becoming convinced 'that they [could only] improve their lot collectively'. While official policy claimed to pursue a policy of egalitarianism, the reality behind these claims was only limited. The producing classes, those of the workers and peasants, found themselves on the same position in the material hierarchy as before, while a decrease in real standards of living were initially concealed only by the relative success of social mobility.
Similar to the England of the early nineteenth century, the creation of a new Eastern European working class indeed took place within the rather short timeframe of one or two generations. Over the decades after the Second World War, an average of nearly fifty percent of the younger peasantry came 'to form the new working class, [and] to create the social drama of a new life, a new world'.
Timothy Garton Ash's assertion that 'December 1970 [was] the single most important date in the pre-history of Solidarity', Its reaction to the government's implementation of food price increases revealed signs of a growing unity and singular purpose of action. When the government resolved to give up its policy of consistent non-unemployment 'aimed at forcing greater productivity through the use of threat of unemployment as an incentive for better and more efficient work', After strikes and violent confrontations throughout January 1971, the government withdrew its economic reform plans, while Gomu This, and the fact that many protests 'involved a large group which was generally representative of the worker population as a whole',
Yet, what made for the timing of this growing self-awareness? Where from came the momentum that enabled workers to start attempting to influence their economic position through strikes? The Polish communist party had, from the onset, based much of its legitimacy through the reasonably successful initiation of a process of social mobility upward. Workers were recruited from among the peasant ranks, while better-educated workers were needed to support the growing bureaucratic apparatus. It also sparked, however, another process, which would later develop into one of the primary reasons for the antagonism between the workers and the intelligentsia as a whole. The quick development of industries created a culture of technocracy, in which economic status became more directly related to 'a hierarchy of statuses based on diplomas, irrespective of the actual amount of work done'. This put pressures on access to higher education as a direct way of material advancement, The attitude of this "red bourgeoisie" was becoming an assertion '[t]hat they do and
The stagnation of social mobility can be said to have a two-sided effect. While, one the one hand, it formed a ferment for discontent because the state failed to meet the workers' expectations of equality, Eastern European 'regimes [had to], in a sense, deal with the workers they have'. A further source of frustration was found in the fact that, despite repeated pledges for reform from the party leadership, very little change was noticed, while concessions were repeatedly watered down. Contradictions were experienced very starkly when any kind of protest was followed by measures on a worker's economic privileges and 'any sign of active solidarity' was immediately called 'political conspiracy'. As now the argument of economic prosperity was no longer something Gierek could count on, the social and political situation became something of a ticking bomb.
The decade running up to the strikes of saw an increasingly untenable paradoxical situation. According to Marxist thinking, communism provided the means to stop the alienation of the workers; yet, they were becoming increasingly alienated. This was clearly demonstrated by the slow production process of inferior quality produce.
Economic alienation eventually meant political alienation, which then began to organise itself. The strikers of 1980 were no longer easily reintegrated. They were 'far more disciplined; they were not committed to socialism or the party' As R.J. Crampton observed,
We have observed that the regime became increasingly inapt to rally the support of the workers for the socialist cause, or to reasonably incorporate them within a plan economy. It is, nonetheless, important to have a closer look at the reasons that caused the process to assume such a radical working class character. Surely, there existed a strong section of "critical intelligentsia", yet their position was precarious: whereas they assumed a role as the voice of the working class, they were also 'part of the intellectual class, from which neither its structural position nor its value-system [allowed] it to secede'.
There were, however, also initiatives from the intelligentsia within broad daylight of the Party's political sphere, which provided powerful criticism of the way in which the state treated dissident workers.
By 1970, n increasing awareness of the existence of social class was observed in Polish society. This classification was not so much based upon political affiliation as upon material wealth. Rapid industrialisation since World War Two had brought new realities urban workers, a large number of them of young age, in a setting of narrowly confined economic possibilities. When rapid economic and industrial development began to slow down and the initial success story of social mobility began to lose its stretch, problems became observable. The popular official state narrative of egalitarianism became increasingly exposed, whereas the state had little means to provide alternative justifications. In a situation that was becoming more and more complicated, the workers soon discovered the power of strike and protest, something which the regime was rather fearful of. With no alternative means of political participation, the working class was rapidly becoming self-aware and radical, while the regime, with a large number of critical intellectuals torn between the rigor of party policy and the difficulty of reform, proved unable to control economic decline and the social outcry against party elitism and decadence. A state that claimed to hold the interests of workers as its highest principle was rapidly losing support from just that group. The strikers of Solidarity were no longer easily drawn back into the folds of socialist society which had, according to them, structurally failed to improve itself. A number of critical intellectuals, however, come to the aid of the workers. The KOR created effective means of communication between different workers' groups, and bridged the gap of solidarity between intellectuals and workers. Nonetheless, the development of Solidarity must be viewed as a broad expression of workers' grievances with the sympathy and support of a number of critical intellectuals.