It was in 1903 that Emmeline Pankhurst and her daughter Christabel founded the Women's Social and Political Union (WSPU), following around forty years of organised campaign for female suffrage organisations in Britain (Banks 1981). After another fifteen years of campaign, interrupted by the First World War, women were finally granted the vote in 1918 through the Representation of People Act. It remains, however, a controversial matter as to whether the militant campaigns of the WSPU actually helped to quicken the vote for women, or not. In order to get a clearer picture of the tactics of the suffragettes, it is worthwhile to take a closer look at their use of the female body in violent, unconventional and often illegal ways, to draw attention to their cause.
The connection of British femininity with a high morality, and the idea of gender equalities through historical argumentation were common ground arguments for the vote in the late nineteenth century. Although arguments of the 'constitutionalists' always sought to stay within the boundaries of middle class respectability, they certainly incorporated argumentation based upon the female body (Holton 1998). The most evident examples of this can be found in racist theories. Female authors attempted to present an image of a superior British race, of which women, had, by necessity, always been part. Charlotte Carmichael Stopes', in her book 'The moral codes, Constitutionalist feminists increasingly began to make use of racial reasoning to support their campaign for the vote (Holton 1998). This provided the movement with a legal means of enhancing female respectability and high morale in a way that was compatible and in harmony with society.
However, after forty years of such campaigns, the women's vote was still nearly as far away as it had been at the outset. This realisation caused the WSPU to seek to pressurise the government, for they were responsible for the problem (Pugh 2000).
The WSPU had become significantly more radical in its tactics, evidenced by the slogan 'vote or freedom' adopted in 1905 (Banks 1981). This implied that the suffragettes claimed physical autonomy, equated with a right to choose how to use their bodies in public and in relation to men. Whenever attacked verbally or physically, as was often the case, suffragettes felt justified in retaliating with similar action. The refusal to be passive, long considered as being a virtue of British femininity (Holton 1998), any more received physical expression (Harrison 1978). This included a campaign to publicly shame cabinet ministers who were against the enfranchisement of women, by marching on their houses and gathering stones outside while singing the 'Red Flag' (Harrison 1978). To a certain extent, this equates to a process of legitimising political behaviour, preceding passive resistance movements in the twentieth century, such as those of Mahatma Gandhi in India
The militants' adoption of a more conflictive attitude, however, was not without criticism. Historians have often argued that the tactics adopted by militants were too extreme in contrast to the constitutionalist position, which supposedly enabled an earlier concession of the suffrage to women (Harrison 1978). It is nonetheless, also superficially evident why the suffragettes deemed drastic means of protest necessary. In 1906 the Suffrage Ownership Bill was discharged again by the parliament and speculation of a long-term strategy was felt among the suffragettes (Vicinus 1985). A continual and prolonged struggle was felt necessary in order to put the issue on a higher terms in the political agenda. Women should be seen everywhere, and the WSPU subsequently adopted a 'protracted endurance battle' (Vicinus 1985). The need for attention was felt great, as the increasing working-class involvement in politics had shifted the government's attention away from the female vote (Vicinus 1985). During the militant phase of the campaign, the suffragettes had to constantly re-establish their position in the struggle for the vote
The battle escalated further when the House of Commons passed the Cat and Mouse Act in 1913. According to this act, women released from prison due to physical ill health, could be re-arrested once they had recovered, and the hunger strikes of suffragettes led to waves of releases and arrests. This infuriated the suffragettes, who relied more and more on symbols for self-assertion (Vicinus 1985). Mass public rallies were organised with banners and patriotic music, with frequent outbursts of angry speeches (Harrison 1978). Because of the extreme attention that the suffragettes drew, the parliament was literally urged to change (Harrison 1978). A statement of 1913 of The Times put it as follows: 'there is no means of escape, the Government cannot dispose of the suffrage leaders, they are the prisoners of the public' (Lawrence 2001). And this is precisely what powerful tactics of the suffragettes enabled them to achieve. By their vehement and defiant arguments, and refusal to rest until their demands were met, they gained a moral victory more powerful than that which the conventional constitutionalists were able to gain in over forty years of campaigning. Even when subjected to ridicule, the suffragettes were successful in providing a persuasive counterargument (York 2000). The resonance between the boundless violence inflicted upon the women's bodies and the morally inferior political methods employed by the anti-suffragist can not be ignored.
Changing tactics: militant martyrdom
The aggressive attitude of the WSPU in addition to the lack of united support by the other suffrage organisations could have been another contributing factor. For although some were radicalised by the WSPU and its militancy, others distanced themselves from such strategy. That is to say, whilst violence of the WSPU promoted clarity and undivided discussion on the suffrage question, it could simultaneously be argued that it aggravated the anti-suffragists and ended up increasing the opposition (Vicinus 1985). The NUWSS further argued against potential desensitisation of the public against the suffragettes, as it feared the militants would become increasingly alienated from the public (Harrison 1978).
The WSPU also adopted tactics of destruction of property, which included bombing campaigns, arson and post office raids (Lawrence et al 2000). The bombs were meant to draw attention to their cause, rather than to cause actual destruction; most of the bombs were basic detonators with no explosives in them. Nevertheless, they were still seen as a danger, and were condemned as terrorist activities (Pugh 2000). Many of the campaigners were arrested for these activities, and some of them were even imprisoned for a number of years (Harrison 1978). The press and the public responded with mixed feelings; condemnation of the WSPU was mixed with general respect for their fighting spirit (Lawrence et al 2000).
Concluding, one can with validity argue that the violent tactics employed by the suffragettes in the Women's Social and Political Union were instrumental in pushing the female enfranchisement forward. Of course, the role of militancy in achieving the vote is highly controversial, yet the connection between their physical tactics and the Female Suffrage Bill of 1918 cannot be denied. The WSPU gave the government an image of what women - and voters - should not be: extremist, unreasonable and stubborn. The suffragettes used their bodies as symbols of warfare against anti-suffrage views on the female gender, and their physical tactics nonetheless managed to place the mainstream of the political process in an uncomfortable position of having to face the questions raised by their campaign. The image of women in British society was changed due to some of the violent tactics of the WSPU; with activism, militant action, and self-righteousness, the suffragette movement succeeded in looking into the contradictions of the political system of the 19 th century, and to push forward on a wave of strong moral introduction of female suffrage. The WSPU carried out wordly arguments, managing to collect enough sympathy and enough protest to render the cause inacceptable for the political institutions. It was the question of putting women's human condition, of their rights and equalities, on a table which would otherwise have remained untouched.
The suffragettes' efforts can be said to be characterised by a curious mixture of Victorian respectability and morality blended with a continual and controversial insistence on their rights. An immense confidence in the female gender to the extent of superior feelings (Vicinus 1985) combined with a strong sisterhood and sense of sacrifice for the cause led Sylvia Pankhurst to burst out even in 1954 against anti-suffragist Violet Markham: 'that foul traitor - who, while the suffragettes were hunger striking, appeared on the Albert Hall platform, [...] protesting against women having the vote' (Harrison 1978: 13). Resultantly, at all times, the suffragettes used their bodies as a symbol of sovereignty and moral superiority over the established political power, and this to point out the flaws in the anti-suffrage argumentation.