The British project of Imperialism was driven by the 'scientifically' proven belief that white males were the natural, biological, superiors to ethnic minorities and women. Consequently, Englishmen considered it to be their right and duty to subjugate the populations of non-Western countries, disseminating their norms of propriety and their notions of what it meant to be 'civilised'. This essay is concerned with showing that this quest was glorified in the popular fiction of late nineteenth century England, and that the gender identities of English men and women were shaped and reinforced by the portrayal of 'uncivilised' people and uncharted, fantastical, territories.
This essay will argue that the construction of gender identity is related to Imperialism and racism as the indigenous people of conquered nations provided white Englishmen with an image of 'uncivilised' people with which they could compare themselves to. Initially, it will be shown that the adventure story of late nineteenth century England provided young Englishmen with the belief that it was their right to propagate Imperialism because of their natural superiority to other ethnicities. It will then be shown that the subconscious dissatisfaction many Englishmen had with the restrictive nature of Victorian society was expressed in their enthusiasm for adventure stories set in societies ungoverned by such constraining norms. The contrast between English women and the women depicted in the adventure stories will be shown as reinforcing women's submissive role in Victorian society. Finally, the latent appeal to Victorian men in the adventure stories of a regression to a 'primitive' state reveals racist presuppositions. The essay begins with a discussion of the adventure story's role in reproducing Imperialist ideals.
The adventure story of late nineteenth century England portrayed the Imperialist project as a positive enterprise driven by the Englishman's right to conquer those deemed 'uncivilised' (Showalter, 1991; 77). The morality of the Imperialist project was rarely questioned in the adventure stories. Its integration into the narrative of adventure stories gave the impression that it was an admirable undertaking, and it provided young Englishmen with a model of masculinity that was 'virile, courageous and purposeful' (77). Thus, Imperialism influenced the construction of gender identities in the late nineteenth century as it provided Englishmen with a potent ideal of 'manhood' from which to shape their character, and the notion of subjugating 'uncivilised' people which was entwined with this ideal placed upon them a sense of responsibility to uphold the English notion of propriety. The projection of the Englishman as the protector of the 'inferior' also established for him an elevated status of 'civilised'.
The adventure stories of late nineteenth century England allowed men to imagine a regressive, hierarchical, environment in which the oppressive, yet victorious, white Englishman could subjugate anyone standing in their way. This idea was particularly attractive in an era where Victorian societies imposed so many restrictions on their male inhabitants (Showalter, 1991; 87). This longing for autonomy can be seen in Kipling's In he describes the actions of the 'naked, brown, fanatical' horde as acting with a 'wild intensity of purpose' and this contrast with the restrained nature of Victorian society served to make the Imperialist project even more attractive to the Englishmen (265). The images of dissolution presented by the 'savage' people portrayed in the adventure stories reinforced the notion of masculinity that was essential to the Imperialist project.
Adventure stories portrayed women as a destructive force which needed to be stamped down or sheltered from the oppressive cultures which were the object of the Imperial project. This is seen in adventure stories such as which presents Indian men as a force so overwhelming that it required the imperialist presence of Englishmen to protect English womanhood (Thompson, 1994; 296-297). Here, women are portrayed merely as passive objects that need to be protected, a notion that is reinforced by the Victorian male view of women as the weaker sex, who, as a result, are in need of a male protector (Macdonald, 2003; 196). Furthermore, the depiction of women as a destructive force implies that women are dangerous to the relations between Englishman and native, a notion which was reinforced in Victorian society by the view that women were weaker related to their moral nature and so prone to 'philandering' and 'flirtations' with native men (Macdonald, 2003; 196). The adventure story, therefore, reinforced the Victorian gender roles as it encouraged the notion that women were the weaker sex and, as a consequence, were to be kept out of Imperial affairs. The portrayal of 'uncivilised' cultures also served to shape the male Victorian identity as it revealed a latent concept of a 'primitive', free, society. The notion of a 'primitive', free, state was appealing to many Englishmen who had a subconscious dissatisfaction with the rigid Victorian structures which restricted their behaviour and impulses (Macdonald, 2003; 195). Imperialist adventures provided the perfect platform from which to explore these fantasies, as they provided the opportunity for the Englishmen to interact with the 'primitive', free, races they encountered in face the danger associated with personal adventures (195). The concept of a 'primitive', free, society was featured prominently in the popular literature of the late nineteenth century in works such as which features the 'virgin' country unchartered by Europeans (Burgess, 1898). This reveals a latent appeal to Englishmen for the notion of a regressive society which was free of the constraints of Victorian ideology.
British men's fascination with 'other' cultures was partially driven by the racist idea that Imperialism was justified by the Englishmen's right to rule over people deemed too uncivilised or immoral to govern themselves. There is an apparent contradiction in the Victorian fascination with the 'primitive'; whilst it was looked upon as something to be feared for its uncontrollable nature, at the same time it was viewed as an opportunity to transgress the rigid boundaries of their own society, to the point where the Englishmen could regress to a 'baser' state (Jaeggi, 2018; 116). This apparent paradox was exemplified in the works of Kipling, wherein he repeatedly portrays the Englishman as the austere and civilised other amidst the backdrop of wilder, 'native' people and landscapes (117).
In conclusion, this essay has sought to demonstrate that the British Imperialist project was revelled in late nineteenth century popular fiction, and that it reproduced the belief that white males were the natural superiors of all other people, not least women. It has also been argued that this quest for domination was driven by a subconscious dissatisfaction of the Victorian male with the prescriptive, hierarchical nature of Victorian society. This led the white Englishmen to identify with the 'uncivilised' people, whom, it could be argued, did not represent a threat to the preconceived, and thus comforting, notion of a racial hierarchy based upon English superiority. Finally, it was seen that the adventure stories strongly conveyed a belief in, and admiration of, the 'primitive' because it provided an escape from reality whereby the male protagonists could drink in these unfamiliar cultures and, more importantly, manifest aspects of their character which would have been suppressed in Victorian society.
It therefore follows from the evidence presented here that the construction of gender identities was related to Imperialism and racism through the emphasis that the Imperialist project (with its racist presuppositions) placed upon white British masculinity. The primacy of white men is conveyed strongly in the adventure stories of the late nineteenth century; 'white manhood' is portrayed as an example of civility and the epitome of the Victorian notions of propriety, whereas women and the oppressed cultures involved are depicted as inferior or dangerous. Imperialism, and the racism it is imbued with, therefore affected men and women's sense of identity by confirming that there was a natural order in British society and the Imperial world, in which white men formed the rightly dominant group.