Sociologists have traditionally been divided into two groups depending upon their ontological position; Individualists emphasise the importance of an individual's action, whilst Collectivists give primacy to the role of social structure in the construction of social reality. Recently, however, these rigidly demarcated ontological positions have been challenged by the emergence of Realism and Structuration Theory. This essay is concerned with assessing the strengths and weaknesses of Individualism and Collectivism; the main issue under consideration is how far these opposing ontologies disprove each other. This essay will argue that neither of these ontologies sufficiently describes or explains the complexity of social reality, and it is because of their deficiencies that I have been persuaded to adopt a Realist perspective. This argument will be pursued by outlining the debate between Nicos Poulantzas and Ralph Miliband concerning who or what constitutes the 'Ruling Class', in order to show how I was first alerted to the stratified nature of social realty. It will then be discussed how Collectivism successfully discredits the methodological premises of Individualism, yet does not constitute a comprehensive ontological alternative. Following this will be a description of how Realism provides the ontological explanations that Collectivism cannot (due to Collectivism's grounding in Empiricism). Finally, the decision to adopt a Realist approach instead of supporting Structuration Theory will then be justified. The essay begins by proving that having an ontology is not an option.
Having a view of social reality is a prerequisite for both constructing a methodology and conducting research. The role of the researcher's ontology is to regulate which explanations for social phenomena are acceptable; this therefore determines the researcher's area of focus and influences how they devise their practical social theories (Archer, 1995; 20-21). This means that the Individualist's premise that social reality is ultimately constituted by individuals determines that their explanations must consist of statements about a person's 'dispositions, beliefs, resources and interaction' (Watkins, 1971; 106). Similarly, the Collectivist's belief that society has structural features which cannot be reduced to the dispositions of individuals determines that their explanations of human action must refer to the influence of non-human features (such as the banking system) (Mendelbaum, 1973; 223-224). Therefore, practical social theories are only considered acceptable if they are predicated upon the explanations (or Having a theoretical starting point when conducting research is vital because researchers who perform data collection and then generate their theories (through inductive reasoning or the grounded theory approach) inevitably reproduce the stereotypes and assumptions of everyday life (May, 2001; 31). Therefore theory is required to provide a level of abstraction which detaches the researcher from the subject (30). It must also be noted, however, that the results of research actually regulate the researcher's own ontological and methodological perspective, as data that challenges the original theory forces the researcher to re-consider their position. The necessity of a having a view of social reality because social reality itself is not united shall now be explored.
The debate between Ralph Miliband and Nicos Poulantzas reveals that a clear distinction exists between social structure and individual action. By debating the importance of either structure or action, these two Marxist writers reveal that having an ontology is necessary as there can be no one unified theory of society, as social reality itself is not unified (Craib, 1997; 269). Ralph Miliband adopts an Individualist approach to answering the question 'who is the Ruling Class?' in his book Due to his ontology Miliband investigates the specific members of the 'Ruling Class' and how they are connected to each other; he concludes that the 'Ruling Class' is constituted of individuals who share a common cultural background (such as attending the same schools) and the common interest of reproducing the capitalist system (as they benefit from it) (Miliband, 1973; 254-259). Alternatively, Poulantzas answers the question form a Collectivist perspective. He emphasises the importance of state institutions that persist regardless of the individual occupying them, and that individuals merely fulfil the 'role requirements' of their position within the capitalist system (Poulantzas, 1973; 242-245). Although these perspectives were presented as oppositional, I considered the merits of each to be complimentary. Neither satisfactorily dismissed the evidence of the other, and the possibility that both interpretations of the 'Ruling Class' could be correct (if reconciled) emerged. Therefore, I was encouraged to believe that there were two distinct strata of the 'Ruling Class', which could not be reduced to each other (and this is one of the central tenets of Realism). In light of this, the premises of Individualism and Collectivism needed to be evaluated.
The comparison of the ontological perspectives of Individualism and Collectivism highlights the flaws of each. Individualists claim that social reality can be best explained at the level of individual action, as this is where social reality is ultimately created (37). This is reflected in their methodological approach; that of 'reductionism' whereby social structures (which cannot be empirically proven) are reduced to statements about individuals (38). Collectivists disprove this reductionist methodology by suggesting that social structures are accountable for social phenomena independently of individuals, and thus have the potential to shape individuals (in terms of their behaviour) (41). Nevertheless, whilst Collectivism successfully disproves the methodological adequacy of Individualism, it cannot refute Individualism's ontological premise because Collectivism is legitimised by an equally impoverished ontological position.
Individualism cannot successfully prove that social structure is not autonomous from, pre-existent to, and does not exert a causal influence over individuals (Archer, 1995; 42). Individualists claim that social structure is not independent from individuals because the social structure is constituted of interpersonal relations (43). Collectivists oppose this idea because it does not take into consideration the importance of social roles in determining behaviour; they state that people behave appropriately to the role they are fulfilling (such as the interaction between a solicitor and a client) regardless of the individuals involved (43). Individual's rebut this criticism by denying the pre-existence of social structure; they claim that features such as 'roles' only exist because the individuals concerned lack the desire or the knowledge to change them (44). Collectivists disprove this claim by adducing the resistance shown by structures (such as the rate of recruitment into the police force) to the concerted efforts of individuals trying to change them; this proves that structures pre-exist and outlive specific individuals and their attempts to alter them by showing that they possess properties independent of the individual's influence (44). Additionally, it can be argued that the dispositions which are so important to Individualists are shaped and restricted by their historical context (Gellner, 1971; 100). Consequently, Individualist's cannot prove that structures do not have a causal influence (such as a low level of recruitment into the police force being causal of a high crime rate in urban areas). Although Collectivism highlights the inadequacy of Individualism's methodological approach, it does not offer a significant counter-ontology, and is therefore inferior to the Realist approach.
Realism offers a different perspective to that of the Individualist and Collectivist by positing that social reality is best depicted by regarding the individual actor and the social structure as distinct yet inextricably linked ontological features. Realists argue that individuals cannot be reduced to the structures around them, as structures are emergent and possess powers that have an effect upon individuals (Archer, 1995; 63). Likewise, structures are not reducible to the individual because structures are the product of many generations of human action, and can therefore persist independent of specific individuals (64). As a result of this view, Realists suggest that the subject of sociology should be the study of the interplay between individuals and the structures they inhabit (66). Realists also address the Individualist's reductionistic viewpoint by forming their concept of the individual from 'cognitive, affective, and volitional states' instead of dispositions (67). Realism therefore promises to fulfil Individualist philosophy's ambition to describe the complexity of social reality, whilst avoiding its methodological errors (such as reductionism).
Conclusion
In this essay it has been described why a sociologist must have a view about the nature of social reality. It was also discussed how the different manifestations of the 'Ruling Class' are representative of the stratified nature of social reality. The different methodologies and ontologies of Individualism and Collectivism were compared to show how Collectivism exposes Individualism's methodological flaws. However, it was then shown that that the ontological premise of Collectivism is not far reaching enough to persuade me to adopt its view of social reality. Finally, Realism was depicted as providing the ontological depth that the Collectivist approach lacks, in addition to its superiority over any other theory that also rejects (or purports to reject) the structure versus action dualism.
It therefore follows from the evidence presented here that I adopted a Realist view of social reality because of the insufficient level of importance and autonomy assigned to either action or structure by other perspectives. Individualism cannot successfully deny the importance of an autonomous, activity causal social structure, whilst Collectivism cannot disprove Individualism's ontological foundations because of its own Empiricist nature. Similarly, Structuration Theory does not transcend the structure versus action dualism, but merely reinvents the terms of the debate in another terminology. Consequently, Realism offers the most comprehensive perspective of social reality because it takes the existence of both individual action and an autonomous social structure as its central tenet, and avoids the ontological and methodological contradictions of the approaches that define these features as inseparable.