In this dissertation it is argued that the development of critical realism by Roy Bhaskar is a positive development for sociology. By successfully critiquing empiricism Bhaskar has developed an approach that can be used to highlight the deficiencies that have been associated with the traditional ontologies available in sociology. It will be shown that Margaret Archer effectively launched an immanent critique of the said sociological ontologies by using the realist ontology. It is also argued that she has constructed a worthwhile methodological complement to the realist ontology. The dissertation then attempts to prove these claims through a discussion of three of the most famous expositions of the concept of power. However, it is through these discussions that it is revealed that sociology will not have to sacrifice its critical character by adopting the realist ontology This is because there will inevitably be disagreement over the 'essentially contested' nature of our familiar concepts. In conclusion, the view will be advanced that the ascendancy of realism within sociology would provide us with a strong foundation from which to develop a body of theories and empirical evidence which would allow us to make a worthwhile contribution to the developments in society, and not just in the academe.
Thesis Statement This dissertation will argue that the development of critical realism by Roy Bhaskar is a positive development for sociology by effectively critiquing empiricism, thereby providing an approach that can be used to highlight the deficiencies associated with the traditional ontologies available in sociology. It will be shown how Margaret Archer launched an immanent critique of the said sociological ontologies by utilising the realist ontology, and has constructed a worthwhile methodological complement to the realist ontology. The dissertation will also seek to show that there is no logical contradiction at the core of realism, and that adoption of the realist ontology does not involve sociologists sacrificing their critical character as there will be disagreement over the 'essentially contested' nature of our familiar concepts. Ultimately, this dissertation will advance the view that the ascendancy of realism within sociology would provide us with a strong foundation from which to develop a body of theories and a collection of empirical evidence that can make a worthwhile contribution to the development of society.
However, it has been argued recently that the development of critical realism represents a threat to the continual development of sociological theory (through the process of critical discussion), because "critical realists are engaged in an hegemonic project which seeks to conceptually re-tool the natural and social sciences" (Cruickshank, 2004; 567). Cruickshank is arguing that critical realists refuse to contribute to the ongoing critical dialogue about reality, and consequently if the critical realist ontology is accepted as the 'infallible' definition of reality, then sociology must necessarily sacrifice its inherently partial character and the diversity of sociological theories contingent upon it.
It will be the dual argument of this dissertation that critical realism It takes as its core text Archer's The arguments of this dissertation will be pursued through applying the main contentions asserted in TMGA to three expositions of the concept of power, namely C. Wright Mills' conception of 'The Power Elite', Parsons' 'power as the symbolic medium of the goal attainment subsystem' and Lukes' 'Three-Dimensional view of power'.
The decision to specifically assess conceptions of It will be the contention of this dissertation that power is part of a corpus of familiar concepts that permeate sociological theorising and are implicitly or explicitly present to a lesser or greater extent in sociological theories of any description; other familiar concepts include 'society', 'values', 'interests' etc. It will be shown how an ontological commitment is implied in the usage of these concepts, and consequently how most sociological theories can be reassessed and ontologically corrected in realist terms. However, it will also be shown that ontological commitment is not the Therefore it will also be argued that the disagreement over the definition and practical application of concepts like power (and the interrelations and interdependencies between the familiar concepts themselves) is not solely determined (although undeniably influenced) by the specific analyst's ontology, and consequently the critical dialogue from which sociology benefits will always be preserved.
Chapter one of this dissertation will introduce the realist ontology and associated epistemology as developed by Roy Bhaskar and Margaret Archer. It will be maintained that the strength of the realist ontology is such that all deficiencies associated with the traditional ontologies available to sociology can be highlighted. Chapter two will discuss Margaret Archer's influential The Making of Modern Social Theory (TMGAt), which launched an immanent critique of both the individualist and collectivist ontologies from a realist perspective. It will be shown that the criticisms Archer launched are valid on a methodological level, yet her subjection of the criticisms to a realist ontology provides a positive contribution to the construction of an adequate ontology. In other words, Archer provides a worthwhile complement to Bhaskar's realist ontology.
Chapter three will be devoted to an exposition and then criticism of the theories of power proffered by Mills and Parsons from an ontologically realist perspective, whilst an alternative morphogenetic approach to studying the substantive problems identified by Mills and Parsons will be provisionally sketched. Chapter four will assess Lukes' 'Three-Dimensional' (3-D) view of power from the realist perspective, yet will also seek to show how much of the critical dialogue regarding Lukes' view derives from the way he inappropriately subsumes many of the different applications of the concept of 'power' in to his 3-D view, and not from his ontological misconceptualisations.
The final chapter will be devoted to a direct critique of Cruickshank's recent article The dissertation will conclude by opposing Cruickshank's claims that there is a logical contradiction at the core of realism because of its insistence on two distinct domains of reality (the intransitive and the transitive) in addition to his insistence that realism should engage in a 'dialogic' immanent critique of ontology. The discussion of Cruickshank's article will draw upon the main arguments presented throughout the dissertation in order to show the validity of the basic realist argument that there are two distinct realms of reality.
Therefore, in order to arrive at the point where a discussion of the strengths and weaknesses of the criticisms of critical realism is possible, one must first understand the argument that critical realism is positing, and so it is to chapter one that we presently turn.
In order to argue that critical realism has provided sociology with a superior ontological perspective of social reality to the individualist and collectivist ontologies, it will be necessary to show that the deficiencies of both of these traditional ontologies stem from their grounding in empiricism, whilst the impulse behind the establishment of the realist philosophy was the necessity for science to break free from the conceptual shackles imposed by empiricism.
In 1975 Roy Bhaskar published Bhaskar has described his approach in RTS as "an immanent critique of empiricism" (Bhaskar, 1989 [1979]; 169). By this he meant that he was focussing on the, "theoretical, explanatorily significant or 'fundamentally' experimental aspects of science" as these were perceived to be the strengths of the empirical approach (and this is what is entailed in an immanent critique, criticising another philosophy or perspective based on its own standpoints). Therefore, Bhaskar developed a philosophy of science which attempted to argue against the assertion that all knowledge is derived from sense data, by developing a scientific approach that would reconceptualise the nature of causality, the role of experimental activity, and ultimately the constituent features of reality.
Bhaskar argued that whilst laboratory experiments may produce observable regularities (or 'constant conjunctions'), these regularities cannot be taken to be causal laws (Bhaskar, 1975; 16). Bhaskar's justification for this assertion was his differentiation between 'open and closed systems'. 'Closed systems' are not naturally occurring in nature and require human intervention to exist (such as laboratory experiments); in a 'closed system' any intervening causes which may prevent a causal mechanism from having its normal effect are excluded (Bhaskar, 1986; 27). Bhaskar showed that the extrapolation of causal laws from observable regularities is predicated upon viewing reality as a 'closed system'. In contrast to this Bhaskar advanced the view that reality is an 'open system' in which causal mechanisms (like gravity) interact with other causal mechanisms and can interrupt their causal effects, therefore the manifestation of effects at the empirical level is contingent upon the interaction between unobservable entities.
The idea of emergence is an important part of realist ontology as it shows how phenomena can have causal autonomy whilst being constituted of entities that lack it; for example, the English language is constituted of words and both emerge from (and are irreducible to) the individual individuals who both use and create them, yet also have causal autonomy from the individuals who constituted them (Archer, 1995; 43). Realism acknowledges the different levels of reality, namely 'the real' (constituted of entities which lack emergent structure), 'the actual' (constituted of real phenomena which have emergent properties) and the empirical (comprised of entities which are the product of human practices including but not restricted to observation) (Bhaskar, 1986; 25).
%
The development of the critical realist framework of science provided a methodology and ontology that was applicable to social reality, and it was Roy Bhaskar's classic text A Realist Theory of Science (RST) which established the basis of Bhaskar's project (Bhaskar, 1989 [1979]; xi). This 'humanistic naturalism' as it was later termed (through reframing it with a specifically social ontological emphasis) was then extended upon by Margaret Archer in her seminal text TMGA.
Archer applies a similar philosophy of upon which the realist argument will be built, will be sown Archer does this by attacking the 'elisionist' ontology of Giddens' 'structuration theory', advanced in his works 'Central Problems in Social Theory' and 'The Constitution of Society' (1981a; 1981b). 'Elisionism' is an approach which opposes the stratification of social reality into individuals and an emergent structure; according to elisionism, structure and individual agency are simultaneously productive, and the only distinction of substance between the two is the temporal priority of structure over agency (Archer, 1995; 62). In 'Central Problems' Giddens does admit that both structure and agency are irreducible to each other, but he tries to reconcile this tension by describing 'duality of structure' as agency which is both structuring and structured (Giddens, 1981a; 79). Archer contests this in TMGA as a mere re-statement of an individualistic or collectivistic ontology as she argues that, "if structure does not causally influence actors, be they individuals or collectivities, then any talk of structure is empty" (Archer, 1995; 63). Therefore, Archer claims that the elisionist approach is inadequate because it does not account for both the separability and the mutual dependence of structure and individual at all levels of social reality (Archer, 1995; 65). elisionist ontology Archer blasts elisionism for not providing an ontology of structure which can account for its causal influence on agents at different levels of the stratified social reality, (as was discussed in the section introducing Bhaskar'srealist ontology). Realism is the ontological approach which Archer claims is able to combine the separability and the mutual dependence of structure and individual at all levels of social reality (Archer, 1995; 65).
However, it is not sufficient to explicate the realist ontology for social reality and declare it to be appropriate without substantiation. In TMGA Margaret Archer also undertakes an immanent critique in the same manner as Bhaskar did in RST; she critiques individualism and collectivism as she argues they were both deficient because of their adherence to empiricism, whilst structuration theory is criticised for sinking structure and agency together, instead of acknowledging their separability, which is the precondition for "explaining why things are so and not otherwise" in society (Archer, 1995; 64). Archer's critique is immanent as she shows exactly how both individualism and collectivism failed to respond to the mutually regulative function of "the tri-partite link between ontology, methodology, and practical social theorising" (Archer, 1995; 3).
Archer critiques individualism because it starts from the empirically secure position that the ultimate constituents of society are people, yet has to incorporate non-human features into its conception of the individual when its ontology is challenged. Individualism's principle that social structures and phenomena must be reduced to statements about the interrelations of individuals (because the individual is the ultimate constituent part of society) leaves it susceptible to criticism from psychologists who state that people themselves can be reduced further still into their underlying psychological features (Archer, 1995; 39). Due to their belief in reductionism it becomes difficult for individualists to deny the psychologists' claim that society is the reflection of the combined psyches of the population (Archer, 1995; 40). However, to defend their position from psychologists Individualists invoke the realist (and collectivist) notion of emergence. They claim that their concept of the individual is unique because it is defined by the individual's participation in This recognition of an emergent structure (such as the English language) contradicts individualism's premise that everything in society is reducible to an individual's dispositions. The response of individualism to this criticism is to incorporate all non-individual and non-dispositional factors into their concept of the individual, such as a person's 'physical resources and environment' (Watkins, 1971, in Archer, 1995; 39). This again reveals a contradiction, as these aspects of social reality are not about individuals or dispositions (the exclusive focus of individualism) yet are central to the its concept of the individual. Individualism's inability to discredit realism's (and collectivism's) conception of social structure provides further evidence of its inability to uphold 'the tri-partite link'.
Individualism cannot successfully prove that social structures are not, "autonomous from, pre-existent to, and do not exert a causal influence over individuals" (as both realism and collectivism state) (Archer, 1995; 42). Individualism posits that social structure is not independent from individuals because the social structure is constituted of interpersonal relations (Archer, 1995; 43). However, this does not take into account that social structures condition behaviour, for example in the form of role fulfilment. Individualism refutes the validity of this criticism by denying the pre-existence of social structure; it claims that features such as 'roles' only exist because the individuals concerned lack the desire or the knowledge to change them (Archer, 1995; 44). Archer disproves this claim by discussing the resistance shown by structures (such as the rate of recruitment into the police force) to the concerted efforts of individuals trying to change them; this proves that structures pre-exist and outlive specific individuals and their attempts to alter them by showing that they possess properties independent of the individual's influence (Archer would also add that the process of 'role fulfilment' by actors is structurally Additionally, it can be argued that the dispositions which are so important to individualism are shaped and restricted by their historical context (Gellner, 1971, in Archer, 1995; 42). Consequently, individualism cannot maintain that structures do not have a causal influence (such as a low level of recruitment into the police force being causal of a high crime rate in urban areas). Although collectivism is not susceptible to the criticisms of individualism's methodological approach, it does not offer a significant counter-ontology, and is therefore inferior to the realist approach.
Archer shows that the flaws of collectivism stem from its inability to transcend empiricist concepts. Collectivism did not define the exact ontological status of 'societal properties' (as defined by Mendelbaum) (Archer, 1995; 49). This is because a societal property cannot be empirically proven as it does not have a tangible existence which can be directly detected by an individual's senses (Archer, 1995; 49). In addition to this, the empiricist concept of causation (whereby a phenomenon only has causal power if it produces constant conjunctions at an empirical level) denies social structures causal power, because they are neither observable nor causal in their effect (based upon this definition) (Archer, 1995; 52). Realism solves this problem as it recognises that society is an open system in which events are influenced by other contingencies, so the causal influence of emergent properties is not to consistently produce observable effects (Archer, 1995; 53). Therefore, collectivism could only challenge individualism methodologically (by showing that some features of society cannot be reduced to statements about individuals) but could not advance a counter-ontology (because of the dominance of empiricism) stating the existence of non-observable properties (Archer, 1995; 54). Realism, however, does not recognise the validity of the empiricist notion that all things which are held to exist must be detected through human sensory experience. The basic tenet of the realism advanced by Bhaskar and Archer is that society is stratified into individuals and the emergent, non-observable, social structure, and that these two non-reducible strata interact and influence each other (Archer, 1995; 61). After immanently critiquing individualism and collectivism, Archer then turned her attention towards refuting the ontology presented by 'elisionary theorising', represented by Giddens' 'structuration theory'.