Adventure stories portrayed women as a destructive force which needed to be stamped down or sheltered from the oppressive cultures which were the object of the Imperial project. This is seen in adventure stories such as which presents Indian men as a force so overwhelming that it required the imperialist presence of Englishmen to protect English womanhood (Thompson, 1994; 296-297). Here, women are portrayed merely as passive objects that need to be protected, a notion that is reinforced by the Victorian male view of women as the weaker sex, who, as a result, are in need of a male protector (Macdonald, 2003; 196). Furthermore, the depiction of women as a destructive force implies that women are dangerous to the relations between Englishman and native, a notion which was reinforced in Victorian society by the view that women were weaker related to their moral nature and so prone to 'philandering' and 'flirtations' with native men (Macdonald, 2003; 196). The adventure story, therefore, reinforced the Victorian gender roles as it encouraged the notion that women were the weaker sex and, as a consequence, were to be kept out of Imperial affairs. The portrayal of 'uncivilised' cultures also served to shape the male Victorian identity as it revealed a latent concept of a 'primitive', free, society. The notion of a 'primitive', free, state was appealing to many Englishmen who had a subconscious dissatisfaction with the rigid Victorian structures which restricted their behaviour and impulses (Macdonald, 2003; 195). Imperialist adventures provided the perfect platform from which to explore these fantasies, as they provided the opportunity for the Englishmen to interact with the 'primitive', free, races they encountered in face the danger associated with personal adventures (195). The concept of a 'primitive', free, society was featured prominently in the popular literature of the late nineteenth century in works such as which features the 'virgin' country unchartered by Europeans (Burgess, 1898). This reveals a latent appeal to Englishmen for the notion of a regressive society which was free of the constraints of Victorian ideology.