The marginalisation of women in contemporary sporting spheres is made possible because of structural inequalities within sport itself, and because of the predominant societal perception that grants 'male sport' higher social esteem. The organisational bodies that govern most sports (even those where the majority of the athletes are female) are typically dominated by men (Bryson, 1994; 51). Similarly, institutions that are linked to sport such as sports journalism and corporations (involved in sponsorship) are conventionally male dominated spheres (52). Even when women do become professional athletes their achievements (and 'women's sport' in general) are largely ignored by the media and consequently receive very little attention or esteem (54). When women are given media coverage it is often in terms of their identity outside of their profession, typically with regards to their relational, marital, or familial situations (58). The justification for this marginalisation of women is the same stereotypes that originated in the public schools; namely that women are weaker and inferior to men and consequently their sport is less entertaining. Due to this contention there has been much discussion as to why women shouldn't compete with men in sports which rely on speed and strength (55). However, some sports rely on stamina and in other sports it is an advantage to be lighter, yet these sports in which women excel are excluded from the debate regarding sporting prowess, which shows this justification for marginalisation has an ideological nature (55). Therefore, contemporary sport influences the social construction of the masculine ideal of dominating women by ensuring that women are prevented from controlling how sporting institutions and organisational bodies are governed, which successfully negates any possibility that female athletes may use these institutions to re-shape the societal perception of 'female sport' as inferior. Whilst it has been established that women are subordinate to men in sport, the nature of men as the oppressing group needs to be discussed.