Much more reproductive choice is now available to women, with the ability to chose whether or not to have children, when to have them and in what context, now a reproductive right given to women. This, combined with shifting social and economic opportunities for women, has lead to an increase in the number of childless women, with, in 1991, twice as many saying that they expected to remain childless as in 1986 (Gillespie, 2001). However the anticipated number of children per woman in Europe and the USA is still near or above two (Bongaarts, 1999), showing that many are still having children.
This essay will focus upon the reasons why women have had children and those that chose to remain voluntarily childless. It will look at the way in which social, economic and personal factors become intertwined with culture and discourses relating to reproduction in order for women to decide upon their reproductive choices. I will start by looking at the decision to have children and how complex a notion it is when one considers the influences that are at play.
Why Women Do Have Children
Many personal reasons for women having children have been identified. The society in which we now live is disaggregated and lonely, and it is argued that women may want children to compensate for this (Andorka, 1978), as they are seen by many as a constant source of love and affection, and are usually totally dependant upon their parents. This idea is supported by Coldwell, who says; 'one's own children provide a unique pleasure which is not substitutable' (1982, cited in Schoen et al, 1997, p335), showing that many women chose to have children for the unique personal rewards that they carry. It is also argued that children are a source of self expansion, enabling women to feel they are moral and altruistic people for producing them (Hoffman and Hoffman, 1973, cited in Andorka, 1978, p338), and that they are a way of reproducing ones self and ensuring ones characteristics remain, an influence becoming perhaps more important as life after death is no longer considered a reality (Gittins, 1993).
However as well as personal factors attracting women to motherhood, economic and social factors may also be influential. Lancaster has argued that children do provide some economic profit, as they can be a way of claiming higher benefits and gaining access to housing, (1965, cited in Andorka, 1978, p364). However it is now felt that economic factors do not influence the decision as much as in previous times, as women are no longer economically dependant upon men, and children are not needed to provide a source of income. Instead social factors have more of an input.
Having children also carries a great deal of social capital in the form of respect and admiration from other members of society. It is argued that women gain respect from other generations in the extended family, leading to a sense of fulfilment which comes through being important to these other generations (Andorka, 1978). This links closely with Coldwell's idea, mentioned before, of children being a source of unique pleasure, as mothers can return to the status of being respected as someone's daughter as well as respected as a mother.
Having children can also provide women specifically with a higher status in society, as mothers are glorified (McDaniel, 1996), and many women may wish to be regarded highly by society. It is also argued that children can give women more power in the domestic sphere, as nurturing is seen as naturally linked to women, so they are given control over this area (Gittins, 1993), and therefore see it as a way of gaining more power within domestic relationships.
Security is another form of social capital that can be created by having children. As well as being a source of security in the form of constant love, they can also provide social and financial security, especially in old age. Morrell found that many women feared old age, as women are now living longer than men (1994) and this fear can mean that women choose to have children to ensure their security, therefore making them an important social resource.
Next I wish to consider why some women do not have children or remain voluntarily childless. As stated earlier changing opportunities for women have meant that it is now more attractive to remain childless. As well as this newer discourses on motherhood are emerging into society, allowing women more freedom in their decision with regard to children.
Patriarchal ideology prescribes particular behaviour for marriage and reproduction; the idea that marriage is based upon heterosexual relationships and that having children is the next natural step (Gittins, 1993), meaning that many women see getting married and having children as a natural progression through life, even in modern society. This is reinforced by strong historical discourses that link femininity with motherhood, claiming that 'true womanhood' is not reached unless women have children, or see having children as their biological and ideological goals (McDaniel, 1996). Culture dictates that it is natural for women to be mothers, and prescribes the number of children that is seen as respectable within our society (Schneider and Schneider, 1995, cited in Schoen et al, 1997, p335). Religious, political and scientific leaders stress that it is only through motherhood that women can be fulfilled, and Gillespie supports this, highlighting the way in which motherhood is seen as natural in modern society; 'the idea that motherhood is essentialist, deterministic, fixed, inevitably fulfilling and central to feminine identity is firmly entrenched in industrial, urban and rural societies' (2001, p141).
This discourse, as well as placing motherhood as natural and essential for defining women, also ensures that women in society without children, both voluntarily and involuntarily, are seen as failed and not proper women. Culture also dictates that those who do not have children are selfish and immoral (Gillespie, 2001), and motherhood is seen as a signifier of normality (Morrell, 1994). Women feel that they should fit in with what is 'normal and natural', meaning that they chose to have children. These ideas are evident in social policy. As the nation relies on reproduction for its continuation, the state has much interest in levels of fertility and tries to encourage women to reproduce. This is done by reinforcing the discourses of motherhood as natural, and through more explicit social policy. This is evident in the USA where abortion and contraception are closely controlled by the state to ensure that women consider having children as important (McDaniel, 1996).
These discourses in society influence the more personal factors that are involved on the decision to become a mother, as they promote the idea that children are a natural progression for women and their main source of happiness. Therefore many women feel that they should have children as it will make them happy, and see it as natural in order for them to fulfil their role in society, and gain status, as society attributes status to women through motherhood in these discourses. Consequently these cultural ideas running through society influence and combine with personal, economic and social factors to create a complex combination of reasons as to why women have children.
When looking at why women do not have children, these same personal, economic and social factors have to be considered, as they may very much influence women's decisions not to have children. Personal factors such as freedom, self fulfilment and self production have been identified, as in Andorka's early research which suggests that childlessness can provide women with a kind of liberation, as women 'throw off expectations of childbearing operations' (1978, p364). Personal desires can play an important role, as many may want to experience a lifestyle that is not based upon having children, and this could be very attractive for some. However this is only possible if there is change in the social context that enables this.
However, there are also economic and social reasons that influence this decision. Through employment women are becoming increasingly financially independent, meaning that they can bear the economic burden of child rearing without entering into marriage (Gillespie, 2001). Consequently this can mean that having children does not often mean economic gain, unlike previously when employers would give promotions to those with children, and there is evidence to suggest that this may have an impact upon fertility rates (Andorka, 1978).
This links quite closely to social factors, as a desired lifestyle can be quite important when considering whether or not to have children. Opportunities other than motherhood are now open to women, especially in economic structures, and some women choose to explore these opportunities, rather than experience motherhood. Women's increasing participation in employment means that they are able to develop careers of their own, and many feel that they gain their identity from paid work and do not want to lose this by having children (Gillespie, 2001). Women now wish to have interests separate from the domestic sphere, and some may believe that having children places restrictions on the possibilities for this sort of lifestyle. Morrell describes it as a desire for 'freedom from and freedom to', where women wish to have freedom from the ties, both financially and emotionally, of being mothers, but also want the freedom to experience a different lifestyle, with flexibility and no guilt. She also found that many did not like the context under which motherhood was supposed to take place, feeling that it would enforce a break from paid employment, therefore economic dependence, and confinement to the home ensuring a sexual division of labour (1994).
These desires for a lifestyle that does not involve children have been made possible by small changes in employment structures, which mean that women can now have a career, and the emergence of discourses, albeit not mainstream ones which allow women greater sexual freedom. Gillespie describes this as 'the post-modern model of reproduction', in which social forces have impacted upon motherhood, meaning that that it is becoming disaggregated with the natural (2001), so motherhood is no longer seen as synonymous with femininity. This shows that as well as there being personal, economic and social factors influencing the decision not to have children, changes in employment structures and new discourses emerging on motherhood and reproduction mean that these factors are possible in modern society. Therefore it is a complex combination of social ideals and personal responses that results in women becoming voluntarily childless.
Overall this shows that there are many complex influences upon the decision of whether or not have children. In the decision to have children discourses on motherhood and reproduction create the ideal that motherhood is both natural and fulfilling for women, and this impacts upon personal, economic and social factors, including security, happiness and social capital, that lead to women choosing to have children. The same idea can be seen in the decision not to have children, as changing opportunities for women, and emerging discourses are making it possible for women to decide that for personal, economic and social reasons, for example lifestyle choices, they wish to remain childless.
In conclusion why women do or do not have children is a complex process influenced by many factors, and based upon a variety of discourses and opportunities ingrained within society, not simply whether or not a woman likes children.