The aim of this experiment was to carry out an enzyme assay to study the effects of pH, temperature and product inhibition on an enzyme and calculate the Michaelis constant and order or reaction. This was carried out by assaying alkaline phosphotase under different conditions measuring the extent of reaction with a spectrophotometer. It was discovered that the optimum pH was 9.5 whilst the optimum temperature is 42 Phosphate was found to carry out product inhibition and the reaction was determined as first order. The Michaelis constant was calculated to be 0.0871.
Enzymes are biological catalysts (they accelerate the rate of a reaction without themselves undergoing any net change) and catalyse most of the chemical reactions taking place in the cell. They carry out this catalysis by providing an alternative reaction pathway with a lower energy transition state. Enzymes are highly specific binding a specific substrate in the active site. The amount of enzyme activity and elements of the kinetics of an enzyme-catalysed reaction can be measured by measuring the rate of appearance of one of the products of the reaction. The effect of a variety of factors on rate of enzyme activity such as pH, temperature, concentration of substrate and enzyme and presence of inhibitors can also be determined using this method.
From the graph showing the effect of pH on the product concentration an optimal range for the pH of the reaction can be determined. This is seen to be between pH 8 and 10 where the product concentration is greatest (see graph 1). This range is due to the enzyme itself being more active at a higher pH and is known as the enzyme’s optimal pH.
An enzyme catalysed reaction has a reaction rate order. If the rate of the reaction at any instant is proportional to the concentration of the substrate then this is known as first order kinetics. Enzyme kinetics can also be described using the Michaelis-Menten equation. This involves the use of two parameters to describe the kinetic properties of enzymes - V K These are linked in the following equation where V
This equation is useful as it can be used to calculate the value of the Michaelis constant (K  The enzyme used in this experiment was an alkaline phosphatase from calf intestinal mucosa (EC 3.1.3.1). It is a dimeric enzyme with each monomer containing two zinc ions held in place by coordinating amino acids. It is found in most mammalian cells carrying out a variety of biological roles such as in the breakdown of nucleotides and DNA related reactions as well as in calcium metabolism. It is relatively heat stable and is active at a broad range of pHs between pH4 and 11.
The synthetic substrate p-nitrophenyl phosphate (pNPP) is a convenient choice of substrate to demonstrate the activity of the enzyme as is it colourless until hydrolysed by the enzyme to the products inorganic phosphate and p-nitrophenol (pNP). p-nitrophenol is yellow at alkaline pHs (although colourless below pH7) and so the hydrolysis of pNPP can be followed using a spectrophotometer if the solution is made more alkaline after completion of reaction (eg. By adding NaOH). This also stops the reaction as at a very high pH the enzyme is denatured. pNP is also very stable once the reaction is stopped.
The aim of the experiment was to quantitatively assay the activity of alkaline phosphotase under different conditions in order to study the effects of temperature, pH and product inhibition on the enzyme. The kinetic properties of the enzyme were also determined with the aim of calculating the Michaelis constant and the order of reaction.
The experiment was carried out as described in the lab manual with the following details:
The graph below shows the varying concentrations of product, pNP, as the pH changes. This shows a clear increase in concentration as the pH increases to start with up until pH 9.5 where the graph peaks and then falls away again as the pH continues to increase. The graph is fairly symmetrical around the peak.
The graph showing the effect of temperature on the product concentration shows a gradual increase getting sharper towards the peak at about 42 Boiled enzyme at 37
Discussion The data clearly shows that the enzyme has an optimum pH of 9.5 and an optimum temperature of 42 After the optimum the activity of the enzyme decreased steadily with increasing temperature and pH. This is to be expected as at high temperatures enzymes tend to become denatured whilst at extreme pHs the enzyme may lose activity (too acidic or alkaline). The product inhibition results show that phosphate is able to inhibit the activity of the enzyme. This is also expected as phosphate is the product of the reaction catalyzed by the enzyme. At higher concentrations of phosphate the enzyme is competitively inhibited meaning that the phosphate is competing with the substrate for the active site.
Graph 4 is an Eadie-Hoftsee Plot to calculate the Michaelis constant. This was calculated from the slope of the graph to be 0.0871. (see Appendix Table 5 for calculation).
The order of reaction was determined to be first order from the graph of product concentration against time (see Table 6 in the Appendix). As the reaction progresses, the rate of increase of product stays constant, indicating that the reaction is first order.
The concentration of product can be used as a measure of enzyme activity as all the tubes started off with the same amount of substrate in each part of the experiment. Therefore the tubes with more product at the end must have had more enzyme activity take place in order to produce more product.