The final part of this paper examines the social fabric of modern Britain, to see whether, despite the emergent views to the contrary, class in reality is still an historical tool that cannot be ignored. In contrast to Marx, who argues that classes serve to distribute power in society, Foucault opines that realities are constructed by discourse and there are no 'real' classes with 'real' interests. However, to proclaim the obsolescence of class on Foucaultian lines is fundamentally flawed, in the face of the evidence of continuing relevance of class in the country. The retired Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr Carey, lamented 'we are still a class-ridden society' This is also the image shared by foreigners. A survey by the We must give a few examples of why this is seen to be the case. Britain's education system bears the hallmarks of class inequality. Meritocracy in education is the creed of the elite, and the public schools still serve a predominantly professional clientele and the higher levels of the armed forces. The Education Minister, Alan Johnson, recently bemoaned an 'obscene social class gap' The data supports this, as exemplified by recent figures from Cambridge University showing that around half of its students are still from private fee paying schools The existence of the monarchy and hereditary titles still provides a noticeable statement on Britain's 'ancien regime' structure, suggesting a continuation of inherent influence and privilege. Despite equality advances in recent years, it is difficult to perceive the honour system as essentially other than remaining harnessed to class rather than achievement, with the lowest level, the MBE, being the common award for the masses. Culture too betrays George Orwell's 'most class ridden country under the sun' BBC Radio 4, and its 'thought for the day', remains the house station for the professional classes and 'good country stock' exclusivity. The television programmes we watch, for example the 'Bucket' family - no that's 'Bouquet' - in 'Keeping Up Appearances', contain clear class patterns. Thus all aspects of daily life provide a constant testament to the endurance of Britain's class structure. Class is not only about discourse and language; there is reality as well as representation.