Cinema is the most recent area of investigation for historians of the Cold War. In this area, however, scholarship has been limited by a lack of focus on filmic intertextuality, and an inability to draw together narrative threads in a coherent way. Films from the 1940s and 1950s have often been ‘forgotten’ or disregarded as mindless escapist entertainments. Moreover, While it is unconventional to view Hollywood’s ‘bombs and rockets’ films as political reflections, to ignore the latent socio-political contexts of the film is to discard an essential facet of the historical scholar’s quest to ‘know’ the past. Indeed, examining Hollywood’s ‘Bomb Films’ provides an insight into the era’s discourse on the prospect of imminent nuclear disaster, the effect of the bomb on man, the proliferation of the bomb and the role of scientists in the advancement of weaponry, all of which are important elements of what might be called the ‘world’ of the Atomic Age. Furthermore, ‘The Bomb’ was not only an agent of death and destruction, but also a symbol of populist intertext, the Cold War’s equivalent to a biblical quotation or a speech from Hamlet. Epigrammatic phrases, such as ‘duck and cover’ and ‘mutually assured destruction’, are used to anchor the political culture of the Atomic Age into memorable moments of easy access.  Given the heavy-handed influence of the US State Department and the Cold War ideology ruling mainstream American culture, we find films of the period which were relatively apolitical, focusing upon technology and wholly ignoring the democratic implications of the bomb. For this paper, such films are termed 'straight'. Most reviewers, however, have tended to ignore any of the subversive messages these films contain, frequently making them vehicles for the celebration of an uncritical sense of Cold War 'Progressivism’. While ideology during the period did denote progressive values and a push for the freedom of expression, this was by no means a simultaneously held belief. What we call here subversive Bomb Cinema includes films where the US propaganda model is turned on its head, making it a target of attack and critique.   The issues discussed here are: Nuclear proliferation, Organisation Man, Scientists and Technology; all of which are represented, in part, within Bomb Cinema. Despite the dominance of US state-sponsored ‘straight’ films, the popularity of nuclear movies in the late 1940s and early 1950s provided a space for critiquing to enter the pop culture vernacular. Moreover, the ‘curtain of censorship’, rather than merely suppressing oppositional voices, also ensures the conflicting messages remain locked in the melodramatic text, and thus, as Melissa Mer + fect of Cold War propaganda.  This paper’s main concern