This essay investigates the different types of stem cells, their origins and properties and why these characteristics have generated so much hope that stem cells can offer solutions to numerous different diseases and medical conditions.
Stem cells are a unique population of cells found in both adult and foetal tissues which have the ability to renew themselves, to remain undifferentiated and to respond to specific signals and conditions, triggering differentiation. Within adult tissues (such as bone marrow, the brain and muscle), stem cells act to replace cells lost naturally, by disease or through injury. As such, adult stem cells are multipotent and can renew their own population and differentiate to yield the specific cells of their originating tissue. An example of this is shown in Figure 1 where haematopoietic stem cells (HSC) found in the bone marrow may divide symmetrically to regenerate their own population, or asymmetrically forming a further HSC and a daughter cell, the latter of which is committed to one of the two major haematopoietic lineages and hence replenishes the body with all the different blood cells (1).
Figure 1: Haematopoietic stem cell (HSC) renewal. (Adapted from 1)
Figure 1: Schematic representation of the ability of haematopoietic stem cells (HSC) to give rise to other haematopoietic progenitors and thus replenish all the cells of the blood (1).  Pluripotent stem cells can be obtained from three sources: primordial germ cells- PG (from the fetal testis or ovary), Early embryonic cells- ES (from embryos) and Extraembryonic germ cells- EG (from early placenta or yolk sac) (2).  The first of these, PG cells are the precursors to gametes and are derived from the germinal ridge (4). In the testis spermatogonia form primordial germ cells which give rise to spermatocytes and eventually sperm. Similarly in the ovary, oogonia undergo meiotic divisions to yield oocytes (4). Development of the PG cells commences around the eight week of foetal development and the cells have the ability to reproduce, differentiate and form any type of somatic cell utilizing processes found in embryonic development (4).
The next source of stem cells is ES, which are obtained from the inner cell mass of the blastocyst stage embryo (3). ES cells, like EC cells, are pluripotent and can form numerous cell types, however a key difference between the two lies in the mechanism of their production. As previously mentioned, ES derive from the inner cell mass (ICM) of the blastocyst, which of course requires the destruction of an embryo in order to be harvested, as a result causing significant ethical issues. In addition to this, the derivation of EC cells requires a virally induced malignancy, making them more of an ethical concern and therefore ES are favoured for research purposes.
Finally, EG cells are derived from the primordial germ cells (PGC), the embryonic precursors of gametes and the same cells from which EC cells derive (4). This final group of cells were identified as having stem cell properties after growth upon feeder layers supplemented with serum and growth factors produced clusters of colonies that were morphologically indistinguishable from EC or ES grown under the same conditions (2).
Figure 1. Symmetric and asymmetric division of HSC Figure 2. Differentiation of ES cells into hematopoietic lineages
If the differentiation of ES can be developed reliably as suggested in Figure 2, then stem cells have the potential to become an important tool in treating some of the major diseases such as diabetes and traumatic spinal chord injury. However at the present time this ability is only available to a very limited number of cell types.
Immunosuppression Concerns
Stem cell research is being investigated to develop technologies to grow, differentiate and use stem cells in medicine to cure a variety of different diseases and medical conditions as was first suggested by Thomas in 1979 (1). With features such as their potential to proliferate without limit and their plasticity allowing them to form different cell types, such studies are generating keen interest and making tangible the potential of cell-based treatments.
The potential of stem cells is not limited to the growth of human cells, and recently adult stem cells have become popular in research studies. It was due to this that the Sloan-Kettering Institute published evidence of the ability of the adult stem cells to generate daughter cells that were committed to a fixed fate (8). This finding suggested to researchers that adult stem cells were naturally capable of differentiating and may therefore offer a potential solution to growing specialist cell types for therapeutic uses.
In contrast to embryo stem cell research, the properties of adult stem cells have proved very difficult to define, resulting in the idea that these cells lacked properties of self-renewal and plasticity (9). Adult stem cells were thought to only be able to differentiate into limited cell types found in their tissue of origin and when stimulated to divide, only did so for a short number of times before finally producing non-replicating cells (9).
However work by Peters and Kroon et al (9) has shown that some adult stem cells may be able to differentiate further than originally thought and can generate some cell types which were previously only achievable from pluripotent stem cells. This investigation into cell plasticity has had a major effect on the current stem cell field as it has raised the issue that some basic molecular changes may be sufficient to reprogram adult stem cells into a renewed state of totipotency and induce direct differentiation to multiple tissue types (9). As such this study and others have shown that stem cells are now generally divided into two separate categories, 'self-renewing stem cells' and a recently defined class of 'plastic-like stem cells' (9). Research by Goodell et al (10) further focused on the issue of adult stem cell plasticity by investigating the ability of hematopoietic stem cells to generate grafts with neural crest cell-like properties. When these grafts were co-cultured with neurosphere-forming neural hemprogenitors it was found that stem cells expressing myelin basic protein were generated. Goodell et al then proposed that these cells may not be haematopoietic-derived but rather could be generated from a sub-population of 'plastic-like' stem cells which had ability to reset themselves into a totipotent state and hence had the ability to differentiate into multiple cell types.
Conclusions
Safety is an important issue with regards to any new medical practice and stem cells, and particularly those obtained from embryos are no different. With every region of the world having different regulations concerning embryo legality, production and use in research, the potential of using stem cells in therapy is reduced as much of the research is restricted due to ethical considerations (2).
In order to ensure safe therapies are developed from ES based treatments, a number of safety checkpoints need to be satisfied. The first is to ensure that the cells derived from ES appropriately target the cell or tissue which requires regeneration. This needs to be considered especially for cel transplants as those cells which are not specifically targeted by the transplanted ES derived compatibe cells are at an increased risk of an immune response against the tissue. As such, for particular immune mediated diseases such as diabetes and multiple sclerosis, high antigenic cells are not suitable as transplants and it is thought that cells similar to those derived from ES before they have been triggered to differentiate may be better for therapeutic use as they are not recognised as foreign by the immune system (2). Therefore for pathological conditions such as diabetes, induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS) may be the most suitable option as much of the own body's immune rejection is avoided.
A second safety issue is the improper differentiation of implanted cells or development of tumours after transplantation. This concern has come from research such as that carried out by Tada in which EG cells were used to study the changed in epigenetic modifications in the germ line by analysing the effects on a somatic nucleus (11). Analysis found that the presence of EG cells caused 'striking changes in methylation of the somatic nucleus, resulting in demethylation of several imprinted and non-imprinted genes' (11). Such modifications were shown to be heritable and affected gene expression (11). This and other findings of a similar nature therefore reinforces the idea that differentiated cells rather than stem cells may be more suited to transplantation.
In conclusion, stem cells are a unique population of cells found in both adult and foetal tissues, which have the ability to renew themselves, to remain undifferentiated and to respond to specific signals, triggering differentiation. Pluripotent stem cells (such as those obtained from embryos) have generated much interest due to the theoretical ability to differentiate into any cell type in the body and hence act to repair tissues damaged by disease or injury. The use of stem cells in medicine looks to become more well established in the near future and therefore this review has demonstrated the potential of stem cells in tissue regenerative therapies with specific reference to diabetes, muscular dystrophy and to the tissue engineering of skin grafts. Finally, the ethical and safety issues associated with stem cells have been discussed and it is clear that in order to fully use the tremendous potential of stem cells in medicine much research needs to be undertaken to examine all the above factors in greater detail.
Diabetes is a condition characterised by abnormally high levels of glucose in the bloodstream which reduces life expectancy by a median of twelve years (Mangel referenced in 13) and affects sixteen million people in the USA (12). The development of this disease can be classified as either type one or type two (1). Type one diabetes, or juvenile-onset diabetes, is an autoimmune condition in which self-pancreatic cells are targeted by immune cells and are destroyed. As a result the islets of the pancreas are unable to secrete insulin in the presence of glucose. Type two diabetes is generally associated with older, overweight individuals and develops when the body cannot use insulin effectively (1). In both cases the result of this disease causes excessive glucose accumulation in the blood which can lead to further complications such as blindness and heart failure.
It has been suggested that transplanted stem cells could overcome both Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes. However, as the success of a therapy is often judged by the degree of relief it gives to the patient, the final decision into whether stem cell-based treatments should be used depends on whether such therapies give a better quality of life than that offered by existing treatments such as exogenous insulin or, as in the case of type two diabetes, lifestyle changes.
The childhood onset of type 1 diabetes predisposes the patient to complicated secondary conditions and therefore this population would certainly benefit from alternative treatment. In addition, intensive insulin therapy treatment doesn't achieve the normal haemoglobin A1c levels which is important in the generation of diabetic organ damage and therefore this problem could be combated using stem cell therapy. As a result, if stem cells were to be used in the treatment of diabetes, they would have to compete against the well-established exogenous insulin treatment and be able to offer significant advantages over this system before the risks associated with transplantation could be justified (13).
The working hypothesis behind using stem cell engineering (as shown in Figure 4) to treat type 1 diabetes is that a stable population of insulin-producing cells can be developed from ES cell systems which can be grafted into diabetic patients and prevent glucose toxicity (12). In addition to this, as technologies such as tissue engineering increase our knowledge in the generation of tissues, it is hoped early-onset diabetes can be potentially avoided through pre-natal screening for those genetically pre-disposed to this condition. In order to achieve the goal of tissue engineering a stable population of insulin-producing pancreatic islet cells it is known that embryonic tissue consists of four stages. These stages are used to convert undifferentiated ES cells into mature insulin-secreting pancreatic islet cells (12). These stages are outlined below and researchers such as Csernus et al., McKay et al., and Roelen et al. have developed these methods Stage 1: Establishment of embryoid bodies  The first stage is the development of the embryoid bodies from which ES cells differentiate. ES cells are grown in suspension and are organized as free-floating aggregates containing between 1000 and 3000 cells.  Stage 2: Formation of pancreatic epithelium  The second stage begins with the formation of the pancreatic epithelium, a process that begins with the development of primitive oetogenic and endothelial-like cells which, when appropriately cultured, differentiate into distinct cell populations known as 'rosettes'.  Stage 3: Formation of Beta cells  The third stage begins with the development of beta cells, the cells in the pancreas which are responsible for the release of insulin. The development of the beta cells is stimulated by the presence of specific growth factors such as BMP-7, which has been found to be particularly effective at encouraging differentiation. Figure 4 - Simplified illustration of the process of stem cell engineering for the treatment of diabetes.  Stage 4: Formation of clusters  The fourth stage of the process involves the clustering of the beta cells, and the growth of cells which link them together through cell-cell or cell-matrix interactions, in order to form functioning islets.  Stage 5: Selection and purification of cells  The final stage of the process involves the selection and purification of the insulin-secreting beta cells. This
This method allowed McKay to go from pluripotent mouse ES to functional, insulin-secreting cells in less than six weeks.
The second milestone in the preparation for stem cell transplantation in the treatment of diabetes was achieved in 2000 when former ES lines were implanted into diabetic mice and demonstrated to reduce, and in some cases even completely normalized, the mice's blood glucose levels (12) This potential cure was tested in mice several times in various ways. The most successful way was shown in Figure 5 in which three day-old neonatal mice suffering from type 1 diabetes were injected with between 107 and 1010 ES cells that had been directed to differentiate to form insulin-producing cells. Mice receiving ten times this dose (1010) showed normal blood glucose levels for more than forty days (McKay as referenced in 12). The process was repeated in adult type one diabetic mice and the results demonstrated that the control of diabetes and the effects of insulin was much improved when ES cells were used. As a result, approval was extended in England shortly after this series of research experiments, to allow the use of ES cells in the treatment of early onset diabetes.
Following transplantation, the diabetic mice were observed and monitored for lower levels of blood glucose. It was found that the transplanted mice required only one third the amount of exogenous insulin required when compared with non-transplanted mice and developed normal fasting and post-prandial glucose levels (12). Such findings provide evidence for the potential of ES cell-derived insulin-producing cells for transplantation in the treatment of diabetes. Furthermore, exploitation of stem cells may also be useful in the development of novel drugs to treat diabetes. Many of the treatments currently used such as the sulfonylureas inhibit extra-islet channels, often with general side effects. If ES-derived cells were to be used in drug discovery, it is possible to test hundreds of compounds on the same population, thus increasing the chances of developing a safe and specific agent. This method of drug discovery has already been successfully used in novel treatments of other disease such as Alzheimer's and by ES-engineered cells being used in the same way, scientists may soon come up with a much safer insulin replacement therapy for diabetes.
In conclusion, stem cells are a unique population of cells that have generated huge potential for use in medicine. Pluripotent stem cells are derived from either the embryo or the adult, and have the ability to differentiate into a wide range of different cell types and to renew themselves indefinitely, properties which could in the future be utilised to treat a range of different medical conditions. The use of ES cells in treating diabetes, for example, raises many ethical and safety issues surrounding the use and generation of embryonic tissues. However, these problems could be avoided by the use of adult stem cells which have recently demonstrated the capability to differentiate into various tissue types previously thought to be impossible. With further investigation these cells may represent a viable and safe alternative to embryo-derived pluripotent stem cells.
A separate area of stem cell study which has developed over the last decade is tissue engineering; this involves the use of individual cells or populations thereof to construct new tissues in vitro (2).  Tissue engineering can exploit the property of process plasticity and the ability of stem cells to self-renew in order to generate various tissues and organoids (structures which possess some of the properties of endogenous organs). As shown in Figure 6, the process of creating organoids usually involves culturing cells on a scaffold to which they can adhere, differentiate and proliferate (16).  Studies such as those conducted by Jones (15) have shown that by manipulating the environment in which stem cells are grown, it is possible to encourage the formation of holoclones, or cell populations which all have identical sets of progenitor and stem cell compartments. This is shown in Figure 7.
There has also been great success in the production of autotomous transgenic autographs derived from pluripotent stem cells. Such cells have the potential to differentiate challenges as those derived from animal models can easily be rejected when transplanted into humans due to the presence of animal specific antigens (15).  In conclusion, stem cells offer a great potential for treating diseases such as diabetes and muscular dystrophy. However, there are still many challenges that need to be overcome before pluripotent embryonic or adult stem cells can feasibly be used in clinical practices including the ethical issues surrounding the production and transplant of embryo-derived stem cells, the safety of such cells and the complexity of directed cell differentiation.
In conclusion, from the research that has been conducted so far in this area it is clear that stem cells in their different forms, obtained from adult and foetal tissues, hold much promise for the treatment of numerous diseases and medical conditions. These cells hold the prospect of regenerating lost tissues and curing diseases which affect millions of people throughout the world. However before this can become a reality many research endeavours into the understanding the factors which regulate stem cells in their natural behaviour are needed so that controlled differentiation can be effectively achieved. In addition to this, safety issues such as immune rejection and infectious agents have to be addressed before any clinical application can be considered.
Although there have been many success stories of different cell lines that have been developed from pluripotent cells and transplanted into animal models, we may find that there are some cell types which are impossible to develop, whilst others may not be suited for human transplantation. With so many unanswered questions and endless possible uses for stem cells in medicine, it is without doubt that stem cell research will remain highly active for many years to come and in doing so will hopefully provide many answers for diseases such as diabetes and muscular dystrophy which affect thousands of people throughout the world every day.