Night of the Living Dead (1968) is arguably amongst the most influential films in popular culture. Following its release in October 1968 it quickly took cult status, with its title frequently making it to the headlines of influential newspapers and magazines. Despite over five decades the zombie craze within pop culture not only still shows no evidence of abating but continues to permeate various other mediums of art. George Romero's classic has been the catalyst for all things zombie-related in contemporary society, triggering a continual fascination with shuffling corpses. The accompanying poster, depicting a zombie hand reaching through the foreground, quickly becoming a recognisable reference to the b-movie classic itself. Nevertheless, the film has, for the most part, been neglected in academic studies. Whilst it is acknowledged as an urban horror classic, it has been subject to very little noteworthy and informed critical analysis. From a historical perspective it is often concluded that the film was an allegory for racism and the Cold War. Whilst these theories are tempting and indeed offer some level insight into the film's narrative, I will instead argue that only by understanding the film's various metafictional references can we determine a definitive stance upon whatNight of the Living Dead offered to contemporary audiences.  Rather quickly apparent is the implicit criticism that the Night of the Living Deadserved to depict on the conventions of the horror genre itself. In setting the events of the film at a cemetery, George Romero takes his audience back to the genre's roots; for it was here that horror fiction began. Consequently, by insidiously implying the genre's evolutionary progress to the 1950s explosion of science fiction and the atomic age, users are pointedly reminded of how this once-grounded genre has since become terrified of its own limitations.  In opening and closing the film with the cemetery, and setting the majority of the scenes in a rural farmhouse, Romero implies a certain inclination back to the settings of classic horror films. What's more, this modern-classicism is further compounded by the film's reliance upon a range of thematic allusions; harking back to narratives of vampirism. For example, invoking the fear of cannibalism as well as the apprehension of the undead; it seems as if the picture wishes to romanticise this classic style of horror, whilst still conveying ideas which are pertinent to society's current climate.  Character