By 1930 Stalin had not only managed to gain extensive personal control and eliminated all his opponents but had also managed to consolidate this power. Accountable to very few Stalin was free to pursue any policy largely unchecked. He had support from the party rank and file as well as from the central committee and the Politburo. With his death Lenin left a vacuum within the party leadership creating economic, social and political uncertainty. This in turn led to a left / right divide within the Politburo over the next steps the Bolsheviks should take, with Trotsky on the left arguing for rapid industrialisation. Stalin's other main rivals faded away either in to political destruction, suicide, execution or expulsion.
I find it hard to justify putting Stalin's rise to power down to any one single factor. It does not seem possible that Stalin reached his position purely due to his own manipulation or political cunning. Nor does it seem realistic that he was put in power purely because he was the politician that most reflected the party rank and file wishes. A number of reasons seems the most probable explanation; I will argue that the most important are as follows. Stalin proved a useful asset to Lenin and as a result Lenin often supported Stalin's appointments and promotions. The positions Stalin held within the party were of vital importance in helping him gain power, his personality and his political prowess were also very important in this respect. The mistakes of Stalin's rivals during the 1920's were to prove fatal and helped him in his ascendancy to power.
The initial important step in Stalin's eventual Premier's post was taken when Lenin appointed him to the newly created post of General Secretary to the Central Committee in 1922. Prior to his appointment as General Secretary, Stalin had been a loyal follower of Lenin and had received a great deal of support from Lenin both personally and politically. He had done important work behind the scenes for the party and was trusted by Lenin to get things done. He had been appointed to the Politburo in 1919 and again in 1920/21 and was also Central Committee Secretary during this time. Lenin became ill during 1922 making it vital he had someone managing the party in his absence; Stalin was chosen despite objections from most other members of the Politburo. He was particularly disliked by Trotsky who predicted after Stalin's appointment as General Secretary what this would eventually mean for Party politics. It appears that one of the main reasons Lenin appointed Stalin to the post, and to other important positions was loyalty. Stalin had 'lacked original independent views and wide ideas on the construction of socialism', and never waivered in his backing for Lenin, making him a safe and useful choice for such posts in a time of uncertainty.
The positions Stalin held within the party were of such importance in handing him the power he required. There was Stalin's position as communist party General Secretary in 1922 which Lenin had supported and which allowed him control over the bureaucracy. He was also in control of the TsKK Secretariat; giving him the power to control those organisations which were essentially mediators with the press. Stalin's control of the unit distributing culture and education provided him with potential to fashion the parties opinions to his designs. He was Chairman of the Supreme Council of the National Economy (Vesenkha) allowing him control over the necessary apparatus in terms of economic and industrial reform. With experience in handling the Comintern and membership of the expanding Politburo, in a few years Stalin had placed himself in a position where '...power could pass to him without bloodshed...'.
Whilst Stalin's administrative skills and positions of power in the party were important for laying the foundations for his rise, his political skill and personality were also of paramount importance. Trotsky famously described Stalin as having 'marvellous organisational traits', and compared him to the '...grey blur of the bureaucractic machine; Stalin was working quietly, persistently, monotonously, without resting, often without sleep, always with the same routine loyalty to one cause - that of Stalin;' although this was undoubtedly a negative account of Stalin's success, the accuracy of it must be acknowledged. He knew how to carry out practical tasks, to operate bureaucratically and effectively, and seemed to have a knack of appearing even that those whose support he wanted offering very little for it; he was successful in gaining the support of the widest possible audience. His political stealth was demonstrated time and again. Edward Acton has written that; 'it was Stalin's quickness of perception, his alacrity in exploitation of passing situations, and his willingness to take risks which won the day.' He was unfussy, pragmatic, and outmanoeuvred his opponents. In short; 'Stalin was a tough, smart and thoroughly unprincipled political operative...he had no inhibitions in the brutal manoeuvres of power.' Stalin had his own idea of how to get on in the party and in the state, he knew what the direction and aim of the Bolsheviks should be, and he set about implementing it. It is clear though that his process was simultaneously subtle and brutal.
It is difficult to believe that it was only this position of trust Lenin had in Stalin that permitted his rise to power. It seems more likely that Stalin's personality and his political savvy were of equal value. His political activity was not only confined to the party but extended to his personal life; he was able to build a network of mutual trust and support throughout the party and the state. He was a 'convincing orator and very patient', and able to use '...uncanny method of seeming the reluctant recipient of demanded trust". Kenez has argued that during the years of Stalin's army service and his period in exile he developed the more Machiavellian tendencies in his political activities; these proved invaluable during the 1920's as the situation within the party and the state was largely characterized by division. He was able to use circumstance to his advantage, and utilise endless amounts of patience. This and his cunning tactics of action in the short term and long term were what characterised Stalin's politics, they allowed him the 'luxury of waiting; allowing time do your work where short term gains were irrelevant, he had the patience to utilise the possibility of future gain.'
In terms of the political stealth Stalin demonstrated during the 1920's leadership struggle, the battle between Trotsky and Stalin is a revealing example. In particular the contrast between their political styles is interesting; Stalin a more typical politician tentatively weighing up policies and seeking out support; Trotsky a rather superior, aloof character, forthright with his often unpopular views on policy, and expecting support to find him. Stalin seems to have exploited the fears of the other Politburo members that Trotsky remained their biggest threat in terms of personal power. It seems doubtful that his motivations for the alliance with Kamenev and Zinoviev were based on anything more than a wish to remove Trotsky from the leadership race. With this kind of backing behind him Stalin 'carried battle in to the wider field of the central committee where he could always secure a majority." Trotsky's potential support was either alienated by his brusque manner, or undermined by Stalin; the committee was reminded that he was a previous Menshevik, and of the many disagreements he had openly had with Lenin. Stalin often used the disagreements and arguments of the past, out of context, as a tool against his rivals. Stalin was able to use Lenin's ban on factions to make punishable Trotsky's attempts to argue his case, and at every chance undermined him; however when the committee called for action to be taken against Trotsky, Stalin defended him and bided his time.
Stalin's rivals all made mistakes in their quest for political gain.Trotsky failed to attend important meetings and was accused of wanting too much power to himself, Bukharin kept quiet during the debates, Zinoviev and Kamenev did not make Trotsky the potential scapegoat of the party and all of them failed to act upon Lenin's wishes to 'split the jaws of Stalin' in December 1922. This mutually destructive tendency enabled Stalin to accumulate enough opposition to secure his elevation to General Secretary and then to his overthrowing the whole system and all its occupants as well as the small amount of checks on his power.
In summary, I find it difficult to justify attributing Stalin's rise to power to one single factor. It is much more likely that a mixture of factors were important and that taken together they helped Stalin gain control. I have argued that the importance of Lenin's support was key, as it provided Stalin with his initial foothold in the party and provided the foundation from which to launch himself. Other factors which contributed to Stalin's ascendancy were his positioning and standing within the party hierarchy, the cult of Leninism created by Stalin and maintained by Stalin after his death, the contradictions in the politics and personalities of Stalin's rivals and most significantly the mistakes of his opponents during this time including the underestimation of Stalin and the failure to recognise the threat which Stalin posed.
I have not argued that Stalin was a passive actor during his rise to power in the 1920's. He was an active force, using cunning, manipulation, and politics to engineer his position. However, he could not have done this without the other factors I have mentioned in this essay. All of them were important and I do not think Stalin would have emerged as leader of the party if any one was missing.