Dividing development into distinct stages has occurred in many areas of psychology, but most frequently in cognitive development of children and adolescents. There has always been disagreement as to whether development should be categorised in stages or whether it is a constantly moving process which never stops. Flavell (1977) suggested that stages in development must show distinct, qualitative changes rather than differences in quantitative ability. He also noted that transition between stages must incur several simultaneous changes in many areas of cognition, and that these transitions should be rapid rather than gradual. Some psychologists have tried to suggest that development is an accumulation of small qualitative changes over time, causing smooth, continuous improvement, called linear dynamics, (Harris & Butterworth, 2002), however most parents and teachers will agree that children's development does feature many sudden periods of growth.
There have been a number of stage models of cognitive development in recent psychology, which tend to agree on many points, such as the number of stages and the types of changes, suggesting that each has some merit. Freud famously described stages of development in children, including oral, anal, phallic, oedipal, latency and genital activity, (Harris & Butterworth, 2002), although these were never given much credit as Freud was seen to overemphasise sexual thoughts in young children. Vygotsky focused more on learning as a result of social interaction, but stated that cognitive development was limited to a certain range at any given time. His ordered stages of development included affiliation, play, learning, peer and work and have had some impact on the teaching of infant children, where the 'play' stage has encouraged more play centred learning in the classroom, (Donaldson, 1987). Other similar stage theories , such as that of Jerome Bruner, (Flavell, 1977), differ from these as they are not age dependent or invariant, and include fewer stages, in the case of Bruner, the enactive stage where knowledge is primarily in the form of motor responses, the iconic stage where knowledge is stored as visual images, and the symbolic stage where knowledge is stored as words or symbols. Bruner's stages have had less impact in the classroom, but his iconic stage has encouraged the use of pictures and diagrams in learning. A more recent stage theory, that of William Perry (1970), concentrates on the development of college students (17-21) and has been used throughout the USA in teaching many subjects. It includes nine points of development, from basic duality (one), through relativism (point five), towards commitment (nine).
Probably the best known and most influential stage model of cognitive development is Jean Piaget's. His model of children's development includes four main stages of cognitive, sensorimotor, pre-operational, concrete operational and formal operational. Piaget was of the opinion that the brain was not merely a receiver of information, but was actively involved in creating knowledge through processes of assimilation and accommodation. During the sensorimotor stage (0-2 years) the child's knowledge of the world is limited to behaviour, and his understanding is only based upon what can be done physically, such asExplore – Predictions – Practical Session – Findings – Conglusions and Evaluate. object permanence. The pre-operational stage (2-7 years) saw the use of symbols, language and imaginative play, but the child was said to be operating without logical thought and was unable to understand rules such as conservation, (Donaldson, 1987). The concrete operative stage (7-11 years) is demonstrated when the child has formed reasoning skills and combines this with practical knowledge and understanding of objects in the world to make abstract conclusions. Finally in the formal operative stage (11+ years) the child creates his own knowledge using structures of thought, forming ideas which can be tested and data collected.
In many ways Piaget's four stages have dramatically changed the form of education today, from school structure to curriculum. His ideas of the ability of children has influenced what is taught to children, for example division would not be taught to a five year old as Piaget says they lack the concept of reversibility, (Dricoll, 2000). In the pre-conceptual stage children cannot focus on more than one task at once, therefore a teacher will usually move children explicitly from one task to another, whereas a seven year old might be expected to listen and work at the same time. The general idea of stages can be seen used in a great many areas in life. Firstly in terminology; children are often categorised according to age, e.g. toddlers, infants, teenagers and adolescents. Secondly stages are used in commercial products including medicines, clothing and toys, where a toy might be labelled for seven to eleven year olds. Most importantly these stages are used in the schooling system, where children of the same age are taught the same material and classes are formed according to age, then grouped into infants, juniors or seniors. This system has worked well for many years and children can be seen to progress much as Piaget implied, however a fault of stage theories can be that children should be grouped according to ability not age, as some children are being taught at an inappropriate level and many are being slowed in their learning by one or two members of the class who think or behave at a lower level.
Stage models of development have been criticised over the last three decades for several reasons; biological models of development have been developed to explain the complexity of the brain, and account for biochemical and genetic changes as well as the physical maturation of the structure of the brain itself. Secondly, transition between stages can be much slower than assumed, or even occur in reverse sometimes, as not all children develop at the same rate so a gradual continuum in development may be more accurate. Thirdly, many stage theories concentrate on age as a marker for development, rather than an understanding of the actual learning process, (Kilpatrick, 1992). Fourthly, fluctuations in performance within one age group and different levels of attainment in each child within one age group suggest that stages may be too restrictive and that a continuous form of development may be more accurate. Finally, stage theorists are criticised for ignoring other influences such as gender, social background or regional influences, which have also been suggested to play a part in development. All of this has led to a decline in acceptance of stage theories in recent years in favour of connectionist or information processing theories, such as those of the Cognitive Science Network, (Kilpatrick, 1992).
Despite the great number of disadvantages to stage models which have reduced their favour over the last twenty years, it cannot be denied that they have influenced our understanding of cognitive development hugely. Many studies of a cross section of western cultures have found that an average rate of development does fit roughly into Piaget's four stages, although with a number of sub-stages, (Bowden, 1994). The idea of stages of development is held by many and still used in the education system as a simple way to fairly divide children. Piaget's and other stage models can be used as a marker for children's development, to suggest where a child of a specific age should be cognitively, and to highlight any possible learning difficulties at an early age, allowing appropriate teaching. Whilst other theories, such as those of connectivity or information processing, might account for the high level of complexity in cognition, they are often thought to be too complicated for use by parents and teachers and less implementable. In the field of development theories a conflict will always arise between parsimony (looking for one general model rather than many different ones) and accuracy (the general model may fail to do justice to the complexity of cognitive development. It must be said that the stage models given so far do oversimplify development and ignore other influences, but perhaps in the future a practical stage theory may be developed which takes into account all we know about physical and neural development in the brain and tries to incorporate the observable changes in skills, education, culture and environment.