The idea of behaviourism has been around for a long time but was made famous by the work of Ivan Pavlov. He conditioned the behaviour of dogs to salivate at the sound of a bell by repeatedly associating the ring of a bell with presentation of food. B. F. Skinner extended this idea whilst working with pigeons to show that animals could be trained to perform various acts in order to get food, as long as the association was made between food and the desired response. Skinner always recommended positive reinforcement such as rewards over negative reinforcement or punishment, (Eysenck, 2002). Such ideas have gradually leaked into the classroom, to increase desired behaviour from children, and even into the National Health Service, to attempt to 'cure' psychological disorders.
Behaviourism operates on the idea of cause and effect - stimulus in leads to behaviour out, and is seen as one particular school of psychology. It is not concerned with the internal thought processes or mental states of an individual but instead looks at their observable behaviour. Skinner believed that people's actions were entirely governed by their environment and said that psychological problems were the result of incorrect learning, caused by environmental contingencies, and so are solvable on a behavioural level. This has encouraged therapies to be developed which attempt to alter forms of behaviour in order to solve a problem.
The behaviouristic approach to learning and education to ensure good behaviour has also been popular. It is a common opinion in the teaching profession that rewards for desirable behaviour, such as wall charts and stickers, act as a strong incentive to pupils and help to encourage learning. Teaching time is also kept to the bare minimum, with animations and pictures used in the place of long informative words, keeping children's attention and ensuring understanding. Some teachers have also attempted to understand particular disturbances and behavioural problems in their pupils and have designed helpful classroom situations to ease them. Although this is very important, such approach is only a short-term solution and doesn't address the cause of such behaviour, or look into any underlying psychological problems, (Kearney, 1998). Similarly programmed instruction attempts to teach people by breaking tasks down into steps and presents a pre-determined reward or reinforcement if the task is completed. In practice though, this can create confusion and emotion as the subject may not know what is supposed to happen at each step. This can prove to be very difficult for children with learning difficulties, as reinforcements tend to be given before understanding is achieved, and it can often give the wrong impression if the correct answers are not understood, (Smithal, 1980).
Not all behavioural therapies use positive reinforcement as Skinner suggested though, and negative, punishing therapies have been used for many years. Aversion therapy is a form of behaviour modification that employs an unpleasant or even painful stimulus to prevent certain unwanted behaviour in patients. The first recorded use of this was in 1930 for the treatment of alcoholism, an area where it is still used today, but in the 1950s aversion therapy was widely accepted as a 'treatment' for sexual deviation such as homosexuality. Men could be shown images of attractive men whilst being administered an electric shock, and then shown pictures of women afterwards. In many cases this didn't work at all but simply gave its patients nightmares. Today aversion therapy is occasionally used on alcoholics, where chemicals such as disulfiram or Antabuse can be given, which react with alcohol to cause nausea and vomiting. The idea is to allow the patient to associate alcohol with the nausea and reduce or prevent excessive drinking, (Eysenck, 2002). Although this can have immediate beneficial effects, it is unethical to cause any patient such discomfort and often does not work in a number of cases where alcoholism has become a way of life and the cause is rooted in deeper psychological problems. Negative reinforcement is not such an effective way of altering behaviour as rewards. It is also criticised for being a controlling approach and it is sometimes asked in who's interest is the treatment - the individual or society? In cases such as alcoholism, paedophilia and antisocial personality disorder the treatment may work in the treatment situation but not in the unpredictable situations of real life, and they often target only the problem, not the cause of behaviour.
Behaviour modification and other training therapies have been much criticised for appearing patronising and for essentially denying any form of free will. It has been pointed out that many of the techniques used have been successful only in a controlled environment and are not indications of real-life behaviour. Of course, no real life situations have a limit to their duration or provide the rewards that the patient needs. There is a need for real life application of learned skills and for the patient to want to effect a real change in themselves. Without this belief any changes learnt through behaviouristic therapy will be only temporary.
Behavioural treatments are often used to control aggression as well and fortunately can often produce a hugely beneficial result. Stott (1970) used reward appetitive desensitisation in the treatment of a seven year old aggressive son. He gave the boy rewards for not responding physically to events that had traditionally caused aggression and upon which the boy had no control such as weather and temperature change, (Grivas, 2002). In numerous research studies, the treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) shows improved quality of life and better academic achievement through increased attention and achievement of tasks. Many students with ADHD have found relief in the classroom by using behaviour modification with a comprehensive reward system, including points, tokens and praise. This is a very good example of the advantages of using a purely behavioural approach to a psychological disorder, however there are still many people argue against it - many refer to its child-like approach where the therapist essentially 'bribes' the patient to behave and won't listen in future if rewards are not given.
With patients who display deep personality disorders though, treatment can be very difficult as behaviour is hard to predict and rewards of this kind give little motivation. One particular example is narcissistic personality disorder, which is an all-pervasive disorder similar to alcoholism but worse. It consumes the whole personality and therefore cannot be changed at will with therapy or training. Narcissists display many reckless behaviours, some incontrollable, and so rational learning therapies rarely have any effect. It is these severe psychological disorders which cannot be treated by a strictly behavioural approach - although behaviour modification can help with some effects, there is no effective therapy for narcissism itself, (Young, 1990).
It appears then that behaviour therapy, in its many forms, can be a useful and well-used form of treatment for some psychological disorders but is rarely recommended as the sole treatment for any mental health problems. In general terms, behaviourism is an effective approach only when used along side other therapies and treatments, including cognitive therapy, counselling or even pharmacological prescriptions. The strictly behavioural approach is only successful in more minor cases of disorders such as posttraumatic stress, anxiety disorders or phobias. Any long term, deeply rooted disorders require careful examination of causes and the mental processes which accompany observable behaviour. It might be said that taken alone behaviour therapy is as effective as other popular therapies alone (Smithal. 1980), but the best approach is a more diverse mixture of psychoanalytic theory, medical treatment and cognitive behaviour therapy.