Qualitative research is theoretically research that leads to dichotomous results, i.e. data values of zero or one; however in psychology qualitative findings are usually those not arrived at by statistical methods, (Grohol, 2005). Methods are usually naturalistic and involve observing behaviour without manipulating variables. Qualitative methods are often thus considered less scientific than quantitative methods, yet they play a vital role in understanding behaviour in its natural environment and are frequently used to develop hypotheses and theories, giving exploratory analysis which can aid quantitative experimental design. Due to the inductive nature of qualitative research, however, it can only be a useful medium when explored in sufficient detail; therefore validity and reliability are critical to its utility.
Qualitative research obviously requires an analysis of non-numeric data and this analysis can take many forms. One of the main areas of research is naturalistic observation, where researchers watch behaviour in its natural environment, as opposed to an artificial, cluttered lab-based study. This has the advantage of being much more realistic, yet observation and coding of non-numeric data need careful analysis to ensure valid and reliable results. In this respect, the observations and recordings need to be natural and revisable. Note- taking, video recordings of events or video diaries have all been found to be useful in getting a valid and reliable qualitative picture, although all such methods have advantages and disadvantages to be aware of.
Quantitative statistics must be performed on the results to try to quantify any findings, in order to gain confidence in the results. To ensure validity the method must be defined, i.e. what was studied, by what methods, why and by whom. Once the results are broken down into data, the researcher can calculate descriptive statistics, e.g. correlations, frequency distributions and dispersion. Results can also be divided by grade, subject or year to quantify differences. More complex statistics can also be used, e.g. multiple regression analysis enables the researcher to identify a range of dependent and independent variables, thus investigating causal relationships. Also when repeated results have been found, then statistical tests can be used to confirm these and thus increase confidence in the results.
To analyse naturalistic observations many researchers use the technique of videotape recording and then coding the results for analysis, as used by researchers such as Pica, (1984); and Foppa, Weiner, Mitchener-Nissen and Moore, (2003). Videotaping observations eliminates errors in recall and as each observation is recorded from the same point of view, possible bias and cultural influences can be eliminated, for example attitudes towards power, gender or race. In order to increase reliability and validity samples need to be taken from as many contexts as possible, e.g. across genders, age ranges, cultural differences, etc, (Foppa et al, 2003).
Apart from these more tangible measures members of other research teams can provide objective views of results and criticism of methods, termed inter-rater reliability, (Merrick, 1993). This could even be used to ensure research was worth undertaking in the first instance, checking of the appropriateness of the sample size and analysis procedure. In some studies, a self-evaluation measure can be employed such as a questionnaire where answers are related to valid, reliable criteria. This is useful for gaining an understanding of participant self-views, (Hayes, 1997).
The results were then compared with an external criterion. Aldert Vrij conducted a study to assess the quality of this criteria and to ensure that any results found with the new method were valid (Vrij & Mann, 2001). The researchers applied their criteria of nonverbal behaviours to a set of photographs and found that experienced human judges could indeed identify basic behaviour correctly, some of the more complex behaviours less so. This adds an external validity to the study, until it is trumped by other methods.
Once results have led to conclusions it I important to validate these in any discussion, to improve the quality of the research. One concept is that of reflexivity, where the researcher reflects on and evaluates the method design and even personal perspective, (Merrick, 1993). This has been used in a study by Vigil, Hodges and Klee (2005) about parental language input. In the introduction and discussion the researchers examine their own theories and expectations, gender, age, culture, political beliefs and therefore possible bias. They then consider ways to counteract this and evaluate the possible input of such bias, an idea known as triangulation, (Merrick, 1993).
It can be seen that with detailed and careful analysis of results and evaluation of possible weaknesses, quality research is possible and is not only useful nut necessary in gaining a deeper understanding of behaviour in its natural environment. Qualitative research can be influential in developing psychological theory but must be looked at with caution. When conducting qualitative research, as many measures as possible must be employed to ensure that conclusions are more than just inferences, and have a sound methodology behind them.