Victorian notions of women's madness were largely influenced by the Victorian Domestic Ideology; paramount during the nineteenth century in defining gender roles, responsibilities and acceptable behaviour. This primarily concerned the middle classes, establishing ideals of womanhood and femininity that were arguably damaging both to those directly targeted as well as other groups within Victorian society striving to emulate the middle class depiction of morality, sobriety and modesty. At the same time, the notion of madness as a disease was becoming increasingly apparent within Victorian society, further highlighting gender and class divisions through varying perceptions of madness and its origins. Whilst there were significant implications in terms of gender, this essay will mainly deal with the effects of social class on women's experience of madness in Victorian England.
Firstly, it is important to understand that madness, in all its various forms, was seen as a female illness. Femininity became inextricably linked with hysteria, along with neurasthenia and anorexia nervosa. The main reasoning for this is to be found in the prevailing misogynistic understanding of female sexuality in nineteenth century England. Women were viewed as emotionally unstable as a result of the functions of their reproductive organs, the precise workings of which received limited medical investigation. The popular theory put forward by physicians claimed that madness was caused by 'the action of the reproductive organs on an unstable nervous system', This was a reductionist view of madness, using biology to ascertain causes of the illness rather than analysing social and cultural factors relevant to the women affected. In this view, female biological functions were seen as the cause of madness, namely the onset of menstruation, pregnancy, childbirth and the menopause. From this it can be seen how madness was viewed in a feminine context, confining women to the subject of psychoanalysis throughout the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The primary origins of women's madness were considered a result of their diseased sex organs, insatiable sexual desire, sedentary lifestyles and inferior minds.
For middle class women, the omnipresent Victorian Domestic Ideology carried much weight with regard to their lifestyles and expected behaviour. Its restrictive nature left middle class women little freedom to choose their path in life or have any influence over their own decisions. Instead, they were expected to conform to social ideals of womanhood, in which they should be obedient, meek and, ultimately, subordinate to the male figures in their lives. This patriarchal system, both in the small scale of family life and the large scale of society as a whole, meant that women constantly had to conform to men's definitions and expectations, in which 'their [women's] sanity was often judged according to their compliance with middle-class standards of fashion'. Thus, while masculinity was synonymous with sanity and emotional health, femininity was synonymous with insanity and corrupt mentality. Being the moral guardians of the domestic sphere, this proved a problem as it threatened the morality of the home and future generations, thus male figures of authority were forced to control female madness to safeguard the population. Ironically, it was not the female half of the population that was protected and helped, instead they were further oppressed. Particularly frustrating for middle class women, puberty was a time when they were presented with the clear distinction between themselves and their brothers. Women came to see that their confinement to the home was the accepted woman's role, depriving them of intellectual and cultural stimulation and highlighting how 'puberty... gives to woman the conviction of her dependence'. With limited outlets for creativity and economic independence, marriage was the only viable option for the majority of middle class women. However, far from being a safe and protected haven it was observed that it was chiefly 'those women who are married, not in paid employment, with children living at home, who are most at risk of being positioned as mad'. This feeling of helplessness and isolation would have caused considerable distress to middle class women who aspired to achieve more, particularly those wealthy, literate and educated individuals who saw the possibility to engage in public life but were prevented from doing so on the basis of their sex.
These limitations would have caused undue stress amongst the confined women, of which many would have interpreted as a form of oppression. Gaining attention through ill health would have been seen as socially acceptable in this context, allowing middle class women to express their feelings of repression and, ultimately, articulate their demands teleologically with some degree of safety. Hysteria and other related disorders would provide an outlet for this discontent, allowing women to express themselves in a socially acceptable way whilst receiving care and attention to at least match that received by the men in their lives.
Middle class women may have found madness a suitable outlet for their anger and frustration, with no other ways to communicate their distress other than attracting attention to their deteriorating health and radical behaviour. It would certainly have gained them the sympathy and attention from those around them, if not the change in their lifestyles that they truly desired.
A different perspective on madness can be found within the working class, largely disregarded in nineteenth century psychiatry. A predominating view of the time was that 'insanity was an expensive disease' Whilst middle and upper class women were retiring to bed with various nervous afflictions, their working class counterparts were busy working to support their families; hence they suffered the dual oppression of class and gender in the suppression of their activities and outlets. This created friction between the desired standards the working class strived to emulate and the reality of what they could achieve given their limited economic and social means, inevitably leading to feelings of frustration and helplessness. Whereas uncontrollable sexuality was a key feature of middle class madness, assumed moral weakness of the working class was the main reason given as the cause of their madness, asserting that 'Poverty was, after all, one of the moral causes of insanity'. Though both showed similar symptoms, the latter was considered a 'more prestigious and attractive form of female nervousness than hysteria'
The treatment of diagnosed madness available to middle and upper class women would have further inhibited their freedom and creativity, usually in the form of the rest cure. Whilst there may have existed the notion that 'Sickness presents a tempting escape from the contingency of the feminine role' It is contestable as to whether many of the women diagnosed as mad were genuinely of ill mental health or whether this was a simple yet effective way to repress those not conforming to social ideals constructed by men. Coincidentally, at the same time that middle class women began demanding more rights and opportunities, 'the female nervous disorders of anorexia nervosa, hysteria, and neurasthenia became epidemic'.
The different views of female madness between the classes can be further examined through considering the various institutions created specifically to house female 'inmates', namely asylums and homes. Whereas asylums were seen as too expensive and unhygienic for the lower and working classes in regards to treating their madness, the upper classes were able to pay to rest there, balancing societal norms of femininity with the popular diagnoses of insanity. Yet, those who could not afford such care were sent to large workhouses and industrial schools that were basically self-sustaining prisons in themselves. Surveyor General Edmund R. Pease claimed in his 1851 report that these places were 'instruments of punishment. There is not patience and perseverance enough on the part of those in charge to enable the female inmates to become honest and industrious'. Thus, not only were working women subject to gender roles but also their class distinction had an effect on the treatment they received for their conditions
Ultimately, it is apparent that both perceived causes and treatments of madness differed between the working and middle classes, affecting the lives of many Victorian women, as well as re-emphasising class divisions in society. Whereas working class women may have used madness as a protest against their economical oppression, middle and upper class women were more likely to use it to protest against the social ideals forced upon them, which also permeated through to the working class as part of the Victorian Domestic Ideology. It can be concluded that madness was gendered in class specific ways, with distinctly separate discourses on the subject regarding each class.