The term Renaissance comes from the Italian word The movement looked back to the superior aspects of ancient times and integrated them with the new developments of the time. The Italian Renaissance is generally associated with the fifteenth century. This period, however, can be stretched in either direction. For example, the term "Renaissance" has been used to describe some thirteenth-century artists, and the great artists of the Renaissance were active until the end of the sixteenth century. The rebirth of the visual arts was one aspect of the Renaissance but the development of humanism and the classical studies of the universities were as important. There were also advancements in music, literature, science and government practices during this period. How far Florence was responsible for these developments can be debated. Robert Black asserts that 'the elitism of Florentine society and the monopoly which the Florentine patriciate had over classical culture made Florence the first and greatest capital of the Renaissance' Jocelyn Hunt, on the other hand, believes that 'the assumption that Florence was pre-eminent is... Burckhardtian, since, it is argued, the scholars of the Renaissance were based in Rome, and in the other universities'
Burckhardt identified Florence as the 'cradle of the Renaissance' It appears as though 'the components for a successful intellectual movement were all to be found in Florence at the start of the fifteenth century' The city was wealthy, banking was highly developed, and papal revenues were often invested in Florence rather than the volatile and dangerous city of Rome. Florence had a high population. It was active in manufacture, trade and commerce. Textile production and metalworking were successful industries in Florence. The city was in a prime position for trade; it was close enough to the coast for sea trade but far enough to keep it safe from pirate attacks. It was also able to trade over the Alps and was close to the Middle East so merchants could bring back the luxury goods available there, such as silk and spices. Florence was primarily a city orientated towards craft-industrial production rather than trade like Venice. This appears to have been a more favourable environment for artists to be produced as 'it was only when Venice turned from trade to industry, at the end of the fifteenth century, that Venetian art caught up with that of Florence'
'Economically, Florence was in the position to lead the way, for it was the wealthiest of the Italian cities' It was a banking centre with the rich merchants being able to finance major works of art and commission buildings that were unaffordable to other cities. The wealthy citizens also offered their patronage to artists. Wealth was of major importance in the city. The wealth of Florence had its roots in the trading of spices, cloths and metals and also in its banking business. Florence was the pre-eminent banking centre in Europe and boasted such wealthy clients as Pope Urban VIII, the King of France and the Emperor Charles V. Within Italy, Florence successfully managed to acquire two of the most powerful and influential families as their patrons, the Albizzi and the Medici. The Albizzi family, who had been creditors to the Popes, had a good relationship with Urban VIII, who borrowed money from them to pay for the expensive renovations to St Peter's in Rome. The Medici, on the other hand, controlled the vast wealth of the papacy after their acquisition of tax farming rights from the papacy. Lorenzo de'Medici was 'immensely wealthy' Cronin has commented that 'it was the bankers and merchants such as the Albizzi and Medici, who conducted the gastly business of usury and taxes, but were able to utilize their wealth for the benefit of artistic patronage'
Wealthy citizens would spend their riches on art and culture. The amount they spent was seen to be an indication of their power and status. Florentine men did not own armies, rather hired mercenaries when they were needed. This meant that they had more to spend on luxuries. Giovanni Rucellai, a Florentine merchant, wrote in 1473 that 'earning and spending are among the greatest pleasures that men enjoy in this life' He, himself, spent much of his wealth on the buildings of Florence, including his house and the loggia opposite, the church of Santa Maria Novella and the church of San Pancrazio. Commissioning artists gave them the opportunities to try out new styles and techniques as well as copying the styles of the ancients. Florence was important in the development of the Italian Renaissance because the artists working there were given these opportunities.
The government of Florence was important in the development of the Italian Renaissance. Italy at this time was not unified and there was not central government controlling the whole country. Instead, many independent city-states competed with each other. Florence was ruled by an oligarchic system which was in theory a republic however in reality it was controlled by a wealthy elite. This system was capable of change. 'When the people wanted something, the government was able to listen and, if it became necessary, to make changes' The state had the capacity to be innovative and reform and this allowed the development of Renaissance ideas. Marco Viviani pointed to this twin character of the ruling system; of tradition and reform. He suggests that it 'was an oligarchy, but an oligarchy which also respected public opinion' Historically, Florence had a reputation for justice and was even called la civile Jaxe. (the civil law) These reforms created an environment that encouraged risk taking, established the status of the private individual in public life and made the city prosperous and attractive enough for artists to work there.
The strong monarchy which had taken over in Milan, Venice and Naples was not firmly established in Florence and, therefore, the merchants and bankers could make decisions based on their own judgement. This made Florence 'a city of entrepreneurs and economic independence rather than a prey to the prince's favour' Black believes that this 'contributed to the high profile which Florentines had in European banking circles by 1500' Florence's status as a rich city, therefore, gave its citizens the opportunity to invest in art and to commission work from the best artists. 'The great passion for magnificence which this wealth encouraged explains why so many outstanding works of art appeared in Florence during the fifteenth century.'
Another reason why Florence took a leading role in the developments of the Italian Renaissance was the relationship between patrons and artists in Florence which was 'remarkable by comparison with conditions in other circles' There was a friendly understanding between them which was in part due to classical texts which exalted the artist and emphasized the esteem that they received in ancient times. These texts 'were not lost on the Florentines' The relationship between Cosimo and Donatello 'went much deeper than that of employer and employee' Cosimo gave Donatello a pension in his old age, which was the first known instance of this type of help given to an artist. The 'championing of artists by Florence's most prominent citizen naturally raised their status' Artists in Florence were allowed to use their own genius. Leonardo was educated in Medici Florence and was 'the culmination of the versatile artist whose rise took place in the city by the Arno' When he moved to Milan, however, he was not understood. He painted the Leonardo replied that 'men of genius sometimes accomplish most when they work least' Similarly, in Rome, relations between patron and artist were not as amiable as in Florence. Cronin notes how 'painters were lumped together with carters and grooms' The artist Davide Ghirlandaio was served uneatable food while working in the abbey of Passignano and was so angry that he dumped his soup over the friar and beat him with the loaf of bread
The economic structure of Florence helped to promote the development of its art and culture. Its wealthy citizens had many opportunities to invest in art and the city had a higher demand for it. Artist's wages were higher in Florence than in most places and for this reason artists from elsewhere often moved to the city. There was also a great wealth of patronage in Florence, Barbero states that the 'achievements of the arts in Florence during the fifteenth century have no equal elsewhere in Italy' Florence had a great number of patrons, from the richest to the humblest citizens, and from the papacy to foreign princes. Barbero has noted, however, that some of these funds 'were destined to be used on works of art and literature, including those of a self-commemorative type' Barbero's claim is reflected in the fact that several artists, such as Michelozzo and Donatello, were employed by the government for some time, rather than by individual patrons.
In Italy, painters, sculptors and masons often belonged to guilds. In some places, such as Milan and Florence, painters had their own guilds. Most of these were quite restrictive. For example, the guild in Padua forbade members to give or sell to non-members and did not allow work to be brought from another district to be sold in Padua. The guild in Venice was also restrictive. Albrecht D The guilds in Florence, on the other hand, were not as powerful. The government held that not every craftsman had to join and it allowed people from other places to work in Florence. Peter Burke believes that 'this more liberal policy, which exposed local tradition to stimuli from outside, may help to explain Florence's cultural lead'
Florence's important contribution to the arts can be seen in the proportion of Italy's cultural elite, the people whose creative abilities are recognized in society, which originated from around Florence. Burke has calculated that around 26 per cent of the elite came from Tuscany, which had only 10 per cent of the population, while the Veneto had 20 per cent of the population but only around 23 per cent of the elite Burke believes that 'Rome's poor contribution needs emphasis' Rome was no longer the beautiful, classical city that it was in ancient times. 'The Middle Ages reversed Augustus's boast that he had found Rome a city of brick and left it one of marble' Materials from ancient monuments had been taken for other purposes and marble had been burnt for lime. Rome was in ruins with woods and undergrowth which sheltered foxes, wolves and hares. Rome's population was smaller then Florence's and was much poorer. This helps to explain Florence's dominance in the development of the Italian Renaissance.
Renaissance philosophers such as Alberti, Ficino and Pico della Mirandola often looked back to classical antiquity for their beliefs and doctrines. Florence, with its long classical tradition, was the ideal place for them to work. Alberti worked on both scientific and aesthetic theory. He promoted the idea of visual perspective as well as outlining a theory of beauty based on mathematics. Ficino revived Platonism and turned it into an important force in the intellectual life of Renaissance Florence which was influential in how the Renaissance was shaped. Pico della Mirandola blended Christianity with Platonic and Aristotelian philosophies to create a philosophical system which was an important influence on the Renaissance.
Despite this, Florence was a key centre of Italian humanism from the start of the fifteenth century until the early sixteenth century. It can even be argued that 'Florence was humanism in Italy' Humanism suffered a period of decline during the latter half of the fifteenth century. It was partially due to the printing revolution which led to the proliferation of printed books. Universal education was now available in printed form and did not rely on humanists anymore. Humanist scholars would no longer be employed by wealthy families such as the Medici and Strozzi. Nor would the studia humanitas receive the generous funding that it had previously. It was also due to Savonarola's religious revival which had been hostile to the humanists and scholars of Florence.
The fact that Florence was in a prime position for trade made it an important centre in Renaissance politics. Florence was a republic, ruled by a Signoria, who were Florentine citizens of noble birth. In the fifteenth century, Florence was one of the wealthiest cities in Europe and was known for its commerce as well as its culture. By 1500, Florence was the pre-eminent banking centre of Europe and dominated the culture, politics, and economy of north Italy. The Medici banking family, led by Cosimo de'Medici, ran the government of Florence and, in many cases, the government of the other city-states in the region.  An aspect of the Renaissance that has been attributed to Florence was the rise of humanism. Humanism is the study of classical antiquity, as embodied by ancient Latin and Greek authors, to form the basis of educational reform in Wales. Florence was a centre for humanism, mostly through the activities of the Medici family. Cosimo de'Medici, his son Piero and grandson Lorenzo were all patrons of humanist scholars. Lorenzo invited the renowned philosopher, Marsilio Ficino, to start an academy in Florence and pay scholars to translate ancient texts. Florence was the ideal city for humanists to live in because it was free from the interference of the Church and built on the classical heritage of the Roman Empire.
The decline of the guilds, which had been so powerful in the period of the Gothic art, left the field open for private patronage. Rich Florentines such as Cosimo de'Medici and the Strozzi families used their money to fund the works of the Renaissance artists. Whilst Venice, famously, created public art, Florence favoured the private patron. Given the strength of the family networks and the limited power of the guilds, it was much easier for the wealthy families and merchants to commission artists. Florence is known for its strong, family-based culture which was the reason why this type of patronage was so easy to achieve.  Florence developed a new style of painting in the fifteenth century. Classical elements combined with an interest in perspective, modulation of light and shadow and realism. Artists such as Masaccio were attempting to bring a new level of naturalism to painting. He used the implications of space created by one-point and two-point perspective, studied anatomy and tried to depict more lifelike figures. The sculptures and paintings of the Renaissance were attempting to achieve the demands placed upon them by patrons. Rich families wanted works that had a classical feel to them that these artists supplied.  The Humanists of Florence were very important in the development of the Italian Renaissance. There have been a number of scholars who have studied the text of the Classics and tried to apply them to the moral and political life of their own times. This study allowed the Humanists to take a much more active role in politics and the running of their city than was possible in previous times. Leonardo Bruni, for example, was a philosopher, a historian, a lawyer, and a statesman. He was the Chancellor of the Florentine Republic in the
Marsilio Ficino, leader of the Platonic Academy of Florence, was responsible for translating the works of Plato which were written in Greek. He also wrote his own philosophical works such as James Hankins has commented on the 'leading role played by Marsilio Ficino and Neoplatonic Philosophy on the cultural life of the High Renaissance' The Platonic Academy of Florence was Ficino's primary vehicle for the spread of his ideas. There has been some debate over the significance of the Academy. Gustavo Uzielli, a Toscanelli scholar, has even suggested that the Academy was nothing but a fable Arnaldo della Torre, on the other hand, wrote The authenticity of Ficino's letters, which Uzielli had suggested to be forgeries, was defended. Della Torre describes how the Academy was founded by Cosimo de'Medici in 1462 and how Ficino was appointed the head. According to Della Torra, the Academy held regular activities such as lectures, disputations and banquets. The Academy was made up of the Medici patrons as well as around one hundred prominent statesmen, poets, orators, doctors, lawyers and ecclesiastics of the later fifteenth century James Hankins, however, suggests tah 'Ficino did have an academy of a sort, but if so, it was a thing quite different, and much less important, than has generally been thought'
Florence played an important part in the Renaissance for it was where artists such as Leonardo daVinci, Donatello and Filippo Brunelleschi worked and flourished. Florence was the main centre for culture and commerce as well as the political centre of Italy during this time. It was one of the most powerful cities and was the birthplace of the Renaissance. The Medici family played a major role in the development of Florence. They employed artists and funded their commissions. This gave the artists the freedom to experiment with new styles and techniques. This was in contrast to the way in which art was controlled in other cities such as Venice and Rome. The political system of Florence, inspired by antiquity, was more advanced than that of other cities and made the city ideal for artistic achievements. The work of Florence's intellectuals, such as Bruni, Poggio and Alberti, inspired the intellectual circles of Ferrara, Mantua and Venice and was highly influential in Italy. Florence's contribution to literature was also important; Dante wrote the 'Divine Comedy' and Ficino translated the works of Plato. The Florence of the Renaissance was a centre for humanist study and its citizens believed that the study of the classics was essential. The city was also influential in the development of history writing. The Florentine Leonardo Bruni revived the Roman historian, Livy's, model and wrote his own philosophical works.  Florence was important in the development of the Italian Renaissance because the cultural pre-eminence of the city coincided with the largest territorial expansion of the time. The city had control of most of Tuscany, expanded its influence with victories over Milan, Pisa and the Ladislas family. Antiquity was used to legitimize these conquests and to establish and maintain authority by comparing Florence with the Roman Republic. At the end of the period of the Italian Renaissance, Florence was still a place
The Black Death had a dramatic effect on the population of Florence. It is estimated that the city's population fell from around 140,000 in 1338 to around 60,000 in 1378 and 'did not recover the pre-plague level until the late fifteenth century' Emergency measures were taken in the late 1340s by the Signoria, which included free distributions of food for the poor, increased wages and controls on the price of food. The economic effects of the plague included the decline in the price of labour and a rise in the price of land. These factors helped to reduce the economic inequalities between the classes and the sharp rise in the number of sane transactions of property and money meant that more people had capital. Patricia Fortini Brown believes that 'it was this enlargement of the class of property holders to include many who had previously had no opportunity for owning land or trade, that constituted the most far-reaching impact of the Black Death in Florence' The influence of the middle class was augmented and they 'were more equipped to take up high office in the state than they had been before the plague' Yale Professor Paul Zimmerman sums up Florence's place in the Italian Renaissance: 'Rome was the ideal of antiquity; Florence was the reality of the Renaissance' For many reasons, Florence was pre-eminent in Renaissance Italy. The city was wealthy, well-populated and in a position for trade and it was also politically freer then elsewhere. The Florentine ruling class was more willing to patronize art then most other Italian cities. Florence was home to renowned artists and other intellectuals such as Dante, Brunelleschi, Donatello, Marsilio Ficino and Colucc
Towards the end of the period of the Italian Renaissance, Florence was still a place of importance. Machiavelli was at work in Florence writing about how men should not only admire the ancients but attempt to put the Roman model into real practical use. His political thought was highly influential. Florence also had influence on the scientific developments of the Renaissance. Copernicus claimed that the earth revolved around the sun, not the other way round which is what had previously been believed. Cronin asserts that this claim 'was a choice, not a discovery, and the basis of Copernicus's choice-as later those of Kepler and Galileo-was the Platonic cosmology revived in Florence'
Florence appears to have had much influence on the developments of the Italian Renaissance. Jocelyn Hunt, however, has argued that 'it may be the case that historians have examined the features which made Florence exceptional, and calculated that these are the essential preconditions for the Renaissance' In this case, it would appear that the importance of Florence has been exaggerated. In the early stages of the Italian Renaissance, in the late thirteenth to early fourteenth centuries, 'Florence had a relatively minor role' Florence had no unique connection with antiquity as Rome did. Its claims to antiquity were 'easily matched or surpassed by many other Italian cities' It has been suggested that 'the new age began in Padua and the other urban communes of northern Italy in the 14th century, where lawyers and notaries imitated ancient Latin style and studied Roman archaeology' Petrarch, perhaps the most influential figure of the Renaissance, never lived and worked in Florence. He achieved much greater fame as a writer than his Florentine equivalent, Salutati.