Charles Darwin provided the first explanation for the means by which evolution takes place. This was by the process of natural selection. A key aspect of Darwin's ideas was that species were not immutable, that they could change in their essential characteristics. It had been a common belief that species were immutable because of the writings in the Bible. Genesis mentioned the species that God had created and it was assumed that only God could create new species. Darwin was worried about the implications of his ideas. In January 1844 he wrote to J. D. Hooker claiming that it was 'like confessing a murder' However, many of Darwin's ideas had been in discussion by earlier natural historians and Romantic thinkers in the decades before he published his Romanticism began in the mid-eighteenth century and reached its height in the nineteenth century. The Romantics questioned old beliefs, requiring proof before they believed in something. They would study nature closely and believed that man was closely linked with the natural world. In this way Darwin was also a Romantic thinker.
Many of the ideas that Darwin proposed in his On the Origin of Species had been discussed by the Romantics in the decades before he published in 1859. For example, 'William Wordsworth and other Romantic writers' wrote of how species changed over time. Unlike the more conservative pre-Romantic naturalists, many of the Romantic writers were questioning old beliefs that species were immutable. Charles Lamb, in his essay and Mary Shelley's book Frankenstein, both suggest that new species could be created. Coleridge was 'the first English writer to give his full acceptance' to the idea that species could change and develop. Even though the Romantics were not evolutionary thinkers they had an understanding that nature was a dynamic and ever-changing system. This is an idea that Darwin adapted and developed.  The Romantics 'cast a sceptical eye on popular theological ideas about the self-evident nature of God's creation and the fixity of species' They began to look for alternative explanations for the world around them. Wordsworth states in his Tintern Abbey that 'We see into the life of things' The senses were seen as the path to knowledge in the broader Romantic philosophy.
Natural selection is a key factor in evolution. Darwin believed that the species have the ability to change and adapt under environmental pressure. Darwin's idea that species change was in direct opposition to the biblical narrative which stated that God had created each species to be 'perfect and unchanging' In his 'On the Origin of Species' Darwin wrote that 'If it could be demonstrated that any complex organ existed which could not possibly have been formed by numerous, successive, slight, modifications, my theory would absolute break down' This is Darwin's way of addressing the church's beliefs directly. In his later 'Descent of Man' he concluded that there had not been ' one single determinate act of creation' Darwin's idea of evolution refuted established beliefs of the Church. It was 'not just a scientific theory but a cultural revolution along the lines of the Protestant Reformation'
The idea of evolution had been speculated on long before Darwin. There is evidence of evolutionary thought being discussed by some of the major Romantic thinkers. For example, Percy Shelley in an essay entitled A Refutation of Deism wrote: 'Man advances in power and strength from the successive efforts of thousands of generations ' Shelley here argues that Man, in the form it is currently, is a product of many generations changes and is not a fixed and unchanging species as was once believed. He also wrote in the preface of a collection of poems: 'That so extraordinary a situation should have been produced by the gradual operation of those laws which appear to be adapted to creatures so essentially inferior to human beings, is one among the many facts which impress upon us the necessity of '
It can be argued that the Romantic ideal of nature was reflected in Darwin's theory of evolution because both extended Man's relationship with nature. Darwin saw Man as part of the natural world, part of the same evolutionary chain that all species belonged too. The Romantics embraced the idea of nature as alive, something that starts and builds all life but also takes it away. They believed that man had a moral duty to nature and had to live in sympathy with it rather than conquering it. The concept of sympathy with nature is seen in Wordsworth's poem "The Tables Turned", in which nature and man are described as 'friend and brother'. This idea of 'friendship' between man and nature also appears in Romantic literature such as Frankenstein and was an idea that Darwin was to support. In his Origin of Species Darwin wrote 'from the war of nature, from famine and death, the most exalted object which we are capable of conceiving, namely, the production of higher animals, directly follows' He sees man as a product of nature, and speaks of nature with sympathy which reflects the Romantic view.  The Romantics also endeavoured to find a connection between Man and nature by looking inwards, by exploring the self. The Romantics conceived of the self as a metaphor for the natural world. They developed a symbol of this inner journey as the journey up a tree. Coleridge wrote of 'yew trees each with a palmy finger directing/High to the Heaven of its thought the invisible lightning' This metaphor of the tree with branches emanating upwards is also used by Keats in his poem "On a Tree Seen Growing out of a Wall". Keats writes of the tree 'struggling forth towards Heaven out of insuperable obstacles'. This image of the tree is a metaphor for the journey of self exploration and enlightenment. It shows the Romantic attempts to connect Man with nature. Darwin also explores this idea in Origin of Species. He speaks of the 'grand tree of life' Darwin was the first to reveal the true method by which species evolve and it is symbolised in his metaphor of the tree. It shows how the species are all related, implying the Romantic concept of the 'unity of life'. The metaphor of the tree is also symbolic of the 'oneness' of Man and nature. The tree is both a physical and a metaphorical connection between the two, and on one level Darwin's 'tree of life' is an alternative to the Romantic concept of the tree of self. The tree unites nature with the self and is a representation of the continuity between the two.
The Romantics were also questioning the idea of an unchanging creation. They were not evolutionary thinkers, but they could see that nature was ever changing. Nature was constantly renewing itself and man was part of this 'evolving scheme of things' Coleridge wrote of 'a gradual emancipation from the ancient religion of matter and the reform of which the new faith of philosophy speaks' He was alluding to a new idea that man was linked to the environment around him.
After looking at all the evidence for evolution, Darwin speculated that 'probably all the organic beings which have ever lived on this earth have descended from some one primordial form' This concept has been alluded to in the writings of some of the Romantics. For example, in his "Ode to the West Wind", Percy Shelley writes: 'The sapless foliage of the ocean, know / Thy voice, and suddenly grow grey, with fear' The plants of the sea respond in the same way to the changing seasons brought on by the west wind as the plants on the land. This is a 'typically Romantic image of sympathetic interactions across... boundaries' It is implied that sea plants and land plants behave in similar ways because they have a common origin. The Romantics were not evolutionary thinkers, but their view of nature was similar to Darwin's in the way that they could see 'one grand natural system'
Some Romantic thinkers believed that God had created the species as they were and that they were immutable. They followed the old traditional views that species were divinely created. Tennyson was one of these people and wrote of the 'Butterfly turning on its zenith a medallion of the sun' This is a both a literal and metaphorical description of the beauty and perfection of creation. Tennyson believed that God had created a world that was 'cloudless' and 'calm'
Despite this allusion to the divine, some of the ideas expressed by the Romantics were more like Darwin's theory. In Keats' "Ode to a Nightingale" he writes: 'The very word is like a bell, To toll me back from thee to my sole self' The self is the focus here. This poem
contains no allusions to the divine. Nature controls it's own processes. 'Keats's "nature", like Erasmus [and Charles] Darwin's, exists without need for, or appeal to, any form of "super nature".'
'In the century before Charles Darwin, a wide range of scientists and writers saw human beings as organisms with important connections to their environment' This included the Romantics. Darwin's theory of evolution did not counter the Romantic view of nature. There were many similarities between Darwin's ideas and those of the Romantics. They could see that nature was not static and unchanging, but that it was a dynamic system that ever changing. The Romantics had a sense that Man was connected to the natural world. Darwin took this idea a step further in his theory of evolution. Although Darwin's purely naturalistic and secular theory opposed the views of some of the Romantic thinkers such as Tennyson who believed that nature was God's creation, certain Romantics like Keats where questioning the divine nature of world.