The working hypothesis behind using stem cell engineering (as shown in Figure 4) to treat type 1 diabetes is that a stable population of insulin-producing cells can be developed from ES cell systems which can be grafted into diabetic patients and prevent glucose toxicity (12). In addition to this, as technologies such as tissue engineering increase our knowledge in the generation of tissues, it is hoped early-onset diabetes can be potentially avoided through pre-natal screening for those genetically pre-disposed to this condition. In order to achieve the goal of tissue engineering a stable population of insulin-producing pancreatic islet cells it is known that embryonic tissue consists of four stages. These stages are used to convert undifferentiated ES cells into mature insulin-secreting pancreatic islet cells (12). These stages are outlined below and researchers such as Csernus et al., McKay et al., and Roelen et al. have developed these methods Stage 1: Establishment of embryoid bodies  The first stage is the development of the embryoid bodies from which ES cells differentiate. ES cells are grown in suspension and are organized as free-floating aggregates containing between 1000 and 3000 cells.  Stage 2: Formation of pancreatic epithelium  The second stage begins with the formation of the pancreatic epithelium, a process that begins with the development of primitive oetogenic and endothelial-like cells which, when appropriately cultured, differentiate into distinct cell populations known as 'rosettes'.  Stage 3: Formation of Beta cells  The third stage begins with the development of beta cells, the cells in the pancreas which are responsible for the release of insulin. The development of the beta cells is stimulated by the presence of specific growth factors such as BMP-7, which has been found to be particularly effective at encouraging differentiation. Figure 4 - Simplified illustration of the process of stem cell engineering for the treatment of diabetes.  Stage 4: Formation of clusters  The fourth stage of the process involves the clustering of the beta cells, and the growth of cells which link them together through cell-cell or cell-matrix interactions, in order to form functioning islets.  Stage 5: Selection and purification of cells  The final stage of the process involves the selection and purification of the insulin-secreting beta cells. This