Legionnaires' disease was first recognised as a distinct clinical entity in 1976 after an outbreak at an American Legion convention in Philadelphia that killed 29 people (1,2). This outbreak led to the discovery of Legionella pneumophila, a Gram-negative, aerobic, non-flagellated, intracellular pathogen responsible for the majority (over 90%) of Legionnaires’ disease cases (3).  Unlike many other waterborne diseases, Legionnaires' disease is not spread by direct contact or through drinking or recreational water (3). Instead, its primary route of transmission is through the inhalation of aerosolized water droplets containing viable Legionella bacilli, which can exist and replicate in various water systems, including cooling towers, evaporative condensers, whirlpools, showers, and air conditioning units (4,5). In addition, the Legionella species has been found in natural aquatic environments, including lakes, rivers, and streams (3,6).  The emergence and characterisation of Legionnaires' disease in recent years has increased the incidence of the illness in both endemic and sporadic cases (1,7). Outbreaks are most commonly reported during the summer months when use of air conditioning units is at its highest, suggesting that a single or source of legionellosis-contaminated aerosols is responsible for inhalation of the organism by susceptible individuals (1,8).  There are numerous similarities between the life cycles of Legionella pneumophila and other waterborne pathogens, with both species having an ability to form biofilms on their environmental surfaces. Biofilms are defined as complex microbial communities held together by a matrix of sticky glycoprotein and polysaccharide exudates, which trap essential but limiting nutrients, such as iron (9). Certain species of amoebae, which are found in large-scale water storage and distribution systems, can also harbour Legionella pneumphila, while forming a physical barrier between the bacteria and disinfectants (3).  In addition to the generation of Legionnaires' disease, Legionella pneumophila can cause a less severe form of the disease known as Pontiac's Fever. The symptoms of Pontiac's Fever include fever, chills and headaches and to date evidence has only been noted during Legionnaires' outbreaks, with no recorded mortalities from this form of the infection (10,11).  By examining the processes occurring within such water storage and distribution systems, it is possible to gain an increased understanding of why more and more Legionnaires' outbreaks are being reported. The majority of these outbreaks occur due to inadequate cleaning and water treatment standards, which means Legionella bacilli are not removed from these systems before they have chance to replicate and spread to potential hosts (1). Furthermore, nutritionally deficient biofilms provide the ideal niche for bacterial growth, leading to increased risk of contaminated aerosols (9).