Legionnaires' disease is a severe form of pneumonia caused by the inhalation of aerosolized water droplets contaminated with the bacterium Legionella pneumophila. Legionnaires' disease is characterised by high fever, chills, disorientation and eventually lung damage (1). Unlike other waterborne infections (such as cholera and typhoid fever) Legionnaires' disease is not contagious and is instead spread through inhalation of contaminated aerosols from air-conditioning systems, showers and spas. In recent years the incidence of Legionnaires' disease has increased, due in part to an increase in the number of large-scale water storage and distribution systems. This essay aims to further understand the characteristics of L. pneumophila and the possible reasons for the increased incidence of Legionnaires' disease.  L. pneumophila is an aerobic Gram negative bacterium belonging to the order Legionellales, family Legionellaceae. This organism has complex nutritional requirements and requires unusually high levels of iron and cysteine (2). These requirements are partly explained by the activity of the two major haem-acquisition systems VDs and TOs which are essential for obtaining iron from the eukaryote hosts cells (3). Other components of L. pneumophila's nutritional requirements include low levels of sodium (NaCl) and aromatic compounds (4). Unlike other waterborne pathogens (which are often transmitted through drinking or recreational water) the spread of Legionnaires' disease is primarily caused by aerosols containing the bacteria being released by air-conditioning systems and showers etc.  It wasn't until 1976 when an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease struck an American Legion convention killing 29 people that it was even recognised as a separate entity. Since that time, a number of clinical studies and epidemiological investigations have been carried out to understand the characteristics of the organism and the increased incidence of the disease. In addition to the generation of Legionnaires' disease, L. pneumophila is also capable of causing Pontiacs Fever. Pontiacs Fever is a mild form of flu-like illness with symptoms that include fever, chill and headaches. To date evidence of Pontiacs Fever has only been noted during Legionnaires' outbreaks and in comparison to Legionnaires' disease there have been no recorded mortalities from this form of the infection.  Until the development of water reservoirs (e.g. cooling towers) and evaporative condensers of air conditioning systems, conditions wouldn't have been ideal for the successful growth and colonisation of L. pneumophila. However, in recent years the number of Legionnaires' outbreaks has increased, the majority occurring during the summer months when use of air conditioning is generally greater. By examining the processes occurring within such water storage and distribution systems, such as microbial biofilms and amoebic-bacteria association, we can gain an increased understanding of why more and more outbreaks are being recorded.  Along with environmental factors (mentioned previously) the role of the humoral (involved in the detection and elimination of foreign entities via the circulatory system) and cell-mediated (detection and destruction of cells infected with foreign organisms) responses must be taken into account.  Firstly, research has shown that it is capable of surviving and even replicating within several species of amoebae, e.g. N. Gracilis and Acanthamoeba polyphaga (5). Furthermore, it has also been noted that L. pneumophila can survive and be transmitted by water treatment processes due to its diverse range of defence mechanisms. These range from impermeability of cell membranes and increased expression of proteins involved in iron acquisition, to the ability to resist desiccation (6). In addition, amoebae also provide a protective niche to the bacteria due to its resistance to biocides, mutation responses and ability to form biofilms (7).  The presence of amoebae in water systems therefore poses a considerable threat to humans due to their ability to protect L. pneumophila from biocides and water treatment processes (8). This fact can be demonstrated by a study examining water samples obtained from five hospitals in Paris. Of the samples taken, 71% contained amoebae and 47% showed presence of L. pneumophila (9). When these water samples were incubated, bacterial replication occurred, providing the sample contained amoebae (10).  This ability to replicate is further supported by in vivo studies of mice infected with L. pneumophila in either its replicative (intracellular) or non-replicative (extracellular) form. The mice infected with the replicative form showed infection of blood mononuclear cells and persistent bacteraemia, features that weren't observed in the mice infected with the extracellular form (11).  From this evidence we therefore conclude that replication in amoebae increases the virulence of L. pneumophila and consequently presents a greater threat to humans.  The ability of the organism to attach to and replicate in macrophages which travel freely in the bloodstream, means that L. pneumophila is protected from the humoral immune responses, which include factors such as components of complement and specific antibodies. These would have typically opsonised the bacterium, directing it to phagocytes who would then clear the infection (12).  In general, when a host organism becomes infected, it is the job of both the innate and humoral immune responses to clear that infection. In the case of L. pneumophila, however, evidence suggests that it is primarily the cell-mediated response which clears the bacterium.  Horwitz et al. (13) demonstrated the importance of the cell-mediated response in non-susceptible hosts. The activity of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from recovered individuals in comparison to age and sex matched controls was measured. The findings of this research are summarised in figure 3 and show that clearly a specific T-cell response has occurred in the recovered patients.  In addition to the data described on the previous page, the supernatants of samples of patient cells exposed to heat-killed L. pneumophila showed greater ability in killing than supernatants from control cells. This therefore supports the idea of a cell-mediated immune response.  There are many stages to the cell-mediated response, however as previously discussed these are only feasible in non-compromised host cells. A critical activator is interferon-gamma (IFN-g). Bhardwaj et al (14) demonstrated that IFN-gamma and tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) induce a host defence response by activating the macrophage to secrete toxic chemicals and lipo-proteins essential for bacterial destruction. In addition, IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha also induce an increased expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class 1 and II molecules, allowing for antigen-specific killing of bacteria infected cells (15).  The evidence presented to support both the humoral and cell-mediated response to L. pneumophila infection suggests a characteristic change in bacteria phenotype as it passes through the various stages of infection. As described in figure 4, upon entry into the macrophage, enzymes are secreted through the dot/ICM type IV secretion system in order to facilitate its replication. Examples of proteins lost from the phagosome during membrane remodelling include the lysosomal marker LAMP-1 and transferrin receptor. The loss of LAMP-1 prohibits the promotion of fusion between early and late endosomal compartments and the loss of transferrin receptors stops the endocytic pathway from occurring and hence virulent bacteria build up in the phagosome (16).  From enzyme activation and membrane remodelling to the production of toxin, flagellin and osmotolerant mutants, L. pneumophila has developed and employed a number of different strategies in order