Qualitative research is associated with meanings and interpretation. It is not reliant upon numerical data as quantitative research is and focuses more upon the context in which behaviour is recorded. The reliability and validity of qualitative research has often been questioned as the analysis of its findings are often open to interpretation (Burman, 1994). Because of this it has previously been claimed that the method is not reliable or valid, although these two terms have always been defined in terms of quantitative research. It is possible that qualitative research is at least as reliable and valid as quantitative research when the definition of what is "reliable" and what is "valid" is altered to reflect the specialist nature of the qualitative method (Merrick, 1993).
In quantitative terms reliability is defined as being the extent to which a particular study could be replicated and the same results achieved (Colman, 2001). Validity can be defined as the extent to which a test measures that which it claims to (Colman, 2001). Using these traditional definitions it is difficult to claim that qualitative research is either reliable or valid. This is because the main tool of the qualitative researcher is discourse analysis and the conclusions made are often open to interpretation as it is the job of the researcher to make inferences as opposed to statistics. There is often a large diversity of meanings that we can attribute to differing interpretations (Parker, 1994). This imposes the confounding variable of researcher bias, therefore reducing the validity of the analysis. It is also claimed that qualitative research lacks reliability, as due to the individualised nature of the methodology it would be difficult to repeat a study and gain exactly the same results (Merrick, 1999).
To increase reliability and validity of the qualitative method a different definition of these two terms applicable to the nature of the qualitative method needs to be established. Merrick (1999) defines reliability when referring to qualitative data as the provision of circumstances in which observers can agree on the interpretation of data taken from the same source. He defines validity as the intention to measure what actually is present in a given scenario. This suggests that within qualitative data there is still a measure of reliability and validity, simply because of the ability of the analyst to agree that the same interpretations have been made from the same source, ideas which echo those of Glaser (1962) who suggested that qualitative research is accurate and reliable by its own definition regardless of traditional criteria.
As with quantitative research, it is possible to reduce researcher bias in qualitative studies. This in turn increases the validity of the analysis. To reduce the chance of researcher bias in-depth training is needed involving the techniques of coding and analysing texts (Whittaker, 1992). Training could also involve different techniques for investigating and analysing data and the recording of data in a systematic way (Whittaker, 1992). It has also been suggested that a framework of analysis should be established at the start of an investigation (Whittaker, 1992). This would involve the development of questions and categories to be used for analysis of the data and would provide a standardised method (Whittaker, 1992). It is also possible for the researcher to use multiple coders to analyse and interpret the data. Different coders would produce different interpretations and with a greater number of coders involved a conclusion could be reached as to when a general agreement had been reached. The rules and criteria used by the coders can then be outlined allowing another coder to repeat and analyse the same material (Whittaker, 1992).
To further reduce researcher bias and increase validity the concept of Grounded Theory has been developed to help remove researcher bias. It suggests that theory should be built up from the observations rather than prior theory (Henwood and Pigeon, 1992). This reduces the chance of the researcher trying to fit the observations made to a prior theory, and also increases the chance that what is being measured is actually there rather than what is expected to be there (Henwood and Pigeon, 1992). There are however problems with this method as no researchers can approach an investigation without prior expectations.
The terms "reliability" and "validity" as defined by quantitative methods are not fitting to qualitative research. To try and impose them onto qualitative analysis reduces the individuality and significance of the qualitative method. The studies often involve analysis of individual transcripts and because you do not get identical individuals it is unreasonable to expect the study to be repeated and identical results achieved (Merrick, 1999). This does not however mean that the research is not of high quality and trustworthy. Once measured against a criterion more fitting to the qualitative method, the quality of the research can be fully established. With validity it is possible to establish whether the researcher is actually measuring what is there by using techniques to reduce researcher bias.
In conclusion Psychology is the study of the phenomena of behaviour and mental processes. An advantage of using qualitative methods is that we can study behaviour in the context of which it occurs which leads to a greater understanding to the meaning behind the behaviour (Billig, 1997). Providing measures are taken to ensure the quality and trustworthiness of the analysis of data collected, the qualitative method of studying psychology is highly valid and reliable when defined in relation to its own methodology.