Human colour vision can most often be described as trichromatic. Having trichromatic colour vision entails having three types of wavelength specific cones in the retina, each of which are maximally responsive to short, medium or long wavelengths of light in the colour spectrum. Short, medium and long wavelength cones maximally respond to blue, green and red light respectively (Goldstein, 2002). Trichromacy is not a uniform feature of human physiology however. Because colour vision is inherited genetically, with medium and long wavelength specific genes being located on the x chromosome, mutations can occur. These mutations can cause a type of colour blindness called anomalous trichromacy, in which the red photopsin becomes slightly shifted (Sanocki, Shevell, Winderickx, 1993). If a woman inherits the three cones for normal trichromacy on one x chromosome, and the three cones for anomalous trichromacy on the other x chromosomes, she will possess two types of red photopsin and therefore have the possibility of four wavelength specific cones. If having four different wavelength specific cones defines tetrachromacy it is highly likely that there are tetrachromats (Jameson, Highnote and Wasserman, 2001). If, however, tetrachromacy is defined by the visual system acting upon this extra cone and creating the neural mechanisms to allow visual experience to be derived from it, then evidence for tetrachromacy is not so forthcoming (Jordan and Mollen, 1993). It is likely that even if the visual system can derive information from this extra cone containing the shifted red photopsin, this is not going to result in a considerably different visual experience to that of trichromats because the shifted red photopsin is only six nanometres (nm) away from the original red photopsin (Winderickx, Lindsey, Sanocki, Teller, Motulsky, Deeb,1992).
The theory of trichromacy is often referred to as the Young-Helmholtz hypothesis. This assumes that colour vision is subsumed by three photosensitive pigments in the retina (Ingler, 1968), where short wavelength specific cones have a peak absorption maxima of 419nm, medium wavelength specific cones of 531nm and long wavelength specific cones of 558nm (Bruce, Green and Georgeson, 2004). Colour vision is inherited genetically with short wavelength specific genes being transmitted on chromosome number seven, and medium and long wavelength specific genes being transmitted on the x chromosome (Bowmaker, 1998). Medium and long wavelength specific genes are highly homologous and it is polymorphism of these which cause variation in colour vision. Winderickx et al (1992) found that a common polymorphism occurs at point 180 on the red opsin, and that this results in the general population having two different types of red opsin, one being alanine, and one being serine. Serine has a peak absorption maxima of 557nm and alanine has a peak absorption maxima of 552nm (Winderickx et al, 1992). This means that if alanine is substituted for serine at point 180 on the red opsin of the long wavelength specific cone, it's peak sensitivity will fall below that expected for a long wavelength sensitive photopsin and the carrier will have a reduced sensitivity to red light (Bowmaker, 1998).
Heterozygous females have two different types of red opsin; one is the one that is found in trichromats, serine (with an absorption maxima of 557nm) and the other is alanine (with an absorption maxima of 552nm). If these two types of red opsin exist then it is possible for a female to have four wavelength specific cones and therefore theoretically be a tetrachromat. It can be concluded that these heterozygous females have the genetic propensity to be tetrachromatic, but this does not mean that she is actually a tetrachromat. This is because in the condition of trichromacy it has been found that even though an extra fourth photopsin can be produced it is only expressed in half the retinal cells (Jordan and Mollen, 1993), meaning that even though females have the potential to be tetrachromat they are not as they are normally suppressed and only express trichromatic cones through one x chromosome, either through chance or through selection.
Cohn et al (1989) made an attempt to investigate this further. First, they compared the most common polymorphism of red opsin, alanine at point 180 for long wavelength cones, to serine. Cohn et al (1989) found that when they looked at a female who was heterozygous for the two polymorphisms, with alanine in one x chromosome and serine in the other, and applied a laser which disabled one x chromosome in each of the cones, almost all of the cones contained either alanine or serine. Normal cells contained serine, but they also found a number of type 3 cells which contained alanine in just one of the x chromosomes in the cone. Cohn et al (1989) concluded that this was a consequence of x inactivation, which is a phenomenon which occurs during embryonic development, where one of the x chromosomes inherited from the mother, is randomly inactivated in the majority of cells in female animals. It is this random number of cells which inherits either alanine or serine which explains why Cohn et al (1989) found that some cells contained alanine in just one of the x chromosomes.
The implications of this are that women have the potential to be tetrachromatic in comparison to men, as women are capable of having four different types of cone cells available to the visual system. This is a highly significant proposition as it suggests the possibility of having heightened colour experiences, that trichromats are not capable of. For women to become tetrachromatic they have to inherit an alanine substituted red opsin on one x chromosome, and the original serine substituted red opsin on the other x chromosome (Jordan and Mollen, 1993). If a woman is heterozygous, this means she has the potential to express both types of red opsins in different cells on the outer plexiform layer of the retina.
Winderickx et al (1992) and Cohn et al (1989) both show that it is possible for a woman to be a tetrachromat. An important distinction has to be made however between being a tetrachromat and having tetrachromatic vision. The requirement for tetrachromatic vision is not as simple as having four different wavelength specific cones. The brain has to be plastic enough to adapt to the extra cones and create post receptoral neural channels to process the information and interpret it(Jordan and Mollen, 1993). Simply having four wavelength specific cones available is known as weak tetrachromacy, but being able to use them is strong tetrachromacy (Jordan and Mollen, 1993). This however is very difficult to test whilst the person is alive, and behavioural tests do not appear to be sensitive enough to accurately discriminate between tetrachromatic vision and trichromatic vision (Jameson et al, 2001).A problem regarding the sensitivity of behavioural tests is that the shifted fourth cones are possibly too close to original trichromatic cones to be able to accurately distinguish between them. There is only a maximum of a six nanometre difference between alanine an serine, and whereas this may be enough to produce a more detailed, complex vision of the world in females who are tetrachromatic, it may be that it is not enough to always be detected in contrived, laboratory, behavioural tests. There is some evidence however that heterozygous females may not only be tetrachromats, but have tetrachromatic vision (Jameson et al, 2001). The fact that Cohn et al (1989) found that there are normal and defective cells operating in the retina implies that the fourth, shifted opsin is operating and that the brain has adapted to receive the input because if it had not, Cohn et al (1989) would not have found defective patches on the retina. This strongly suggests that as well as having four different cones responding to different wavelengths of light, they are also all being utilised.
Despite possible physiological ability for humans to be tetrachromats, there is evidence to suggest that human's are not usually tetrachromatic. Jordan and Mollen (1993) asked participants in an experiment who had medium and long wavelength specific genes on different x chromosomes (heterozygous carriers) to match ratios of red and green light, and yellow and green light. The finds that the test was not sensitive enough to detect tetrachromacy and the results of the heterozygous carriers and the trichromatic participants were the same. This suggest that humans do not have tetrachromatic vision as a general rule, but that this is only an ability which certain females possess. There are primates, such as New World Monkeys however, which have tetrachromatic colour vision. Neitz (2002) used microspectophotometer techniques to identify four photopsins in Owl Monkeys with peak sensitivities of 406nm, 507nm, 532nm and 560nm respectively. The fourth photopsin was shown to be a shifted long wavelength specific opsin with an absorption maxima of 560nm, as opposed to the 558nm of the normal long wavelength specific cone. Thus it can be seen that New World Monkeys have four wavelength specific cones, and Neitz (2002) was able to demonstrate that these are used to enhance colour vision. The light measurement techniques used demonstrate that the fourth wavelength specific photopsin is being used by the animals for a richer and more enhanced visual experience. The importance of this however is that it demonstrates that if an organism has four wavelength specific photopsins, it is physically and psychophysically capable of producing neural mechanisms to allow tetrachromatic vision to be used.
Evidence of human ability to create neural mechanisms in order to use the information from the fourth photopsin is not as conclusive as evidence from new world monkeys as it is not possible to use microspectrophotometer techniques. Behavioural evidence has illustrated some possible cases of full tetrachromacy however. Jordan and Mollen (1993) asked heterozygous carries of anomalous trichromacy and trichromatic controls to adjust a mixture of green and orange light, and yellow and red light, to obtain a match. They found no significant difference in behaviour between the two groups, suggesting either that this is not a sensitive enough measure of tetrachromacy, or that people may carry four wavelength sensitive cones, but cannot actually use them due to the structure of the brain. Jordan and Mollen (1993) did find one person however, who they label as cDa7, who found only one combination of the two mixtures that would give a match. The other trichromatic controls and the heterozygous carriers had a greater variability in the repeated responses they gave on the ratio matching tasks, whereas cDa7 repeatedly gave the same response. This implies that she had greater ability to distinguish between the colours to gain a precise match and therefore her visual system was using tetrachromatic vision as opposed to the extra, shifted cone not being utilised.
It may be that all the heterozygous carriers used in the study did have tetrachromatic vision, it was just that cDa7 had shifted opsins far enough away from the original cones required from trichromacy, to be detected by such behavioural techniques. Overall however, it suggests that even if all the heterozygous carriers do have tetrachromatic vision which has not been picked up by the tests, their vision cannot be considerably different to that of a trichromatic's vision.
To further research this area, Jameson et al, (2001) tried to investigate tetrachromacy using techniques that they considered to be more reliable, and found a far higher incidence rate of tetrachromacy. Jameson et al, (2001) propose that ratio matching is not a reliable technique to measure tetrachromacy because it does not take into consideration real world viewing situations, such as surfaces, textures and surround contexts variations. It was suggested that many colour vision mechanisms only become active when there is sufficient variation and context in the light, which cannot be captured by ratio matches. Instead Jameson et al, (2001) asked participants to identify spectral delineations for a diffracted spectral stimulus. Although this is not entirely reflective of real world viewing conditions, it does offer more variability to the retina than simple ratio matching techniques. It was found from this that heterozygous carriers of the two types of red opsin, delineated more bands of colour in the diffracted spectrum than a control group of non heterozygous trichromatic females. This removes any differences that may be attributed to gender (Jameson et al, 2001) and also implies that the two groups of females are experiencing different perceptions of colour. This also suggests that the heterozygous carriers are experiencing strong tetrachromacy and that their visual system is utilising the fourth photopsin. This evidence demonstrates a stronger tendency for heterozygous females to exhibit tetrachromatic colour vision than Jordan and Mollen (1993) found, and it is likely that this is a more sensitive measure of colour perception. It also suggests that the viewing experiences of women who have the propensity to be tetrachromatic, in this case, is more advanced than women who are not heterozygous than expected by Jordan and Mollen (1993).
Further evidence that the human visual system should be able to accommodate a fourth wavelength specific cone comes indirectly from Neitz, Carroll, Youmauchi, Neitz and Williams, (2002). They demonstrated that the visual system is plastic and can adapt to environmental stimuli after it is fully developed. Neitz et al, (2002) asked people to wear coloured filters to alter their chromatic experience. They found that as a result of this there was a shift in colour perception which lasted for nearly two weeks after the filters had been removed. This shows the nervous system's ability to use experience gained from the environment and adjust the inputs to the red and green channel to accommodate this. The implication of this is that if the visual system can adapt and change inputs to the red and green system to external stimuli, it should also be able to do the same to internal stimuli, such as receiving input from an extra photopsin.
The majority of the evidence discussed suggests that there are tetrachromats. It has been shown by Winderickx et al, (1992) and Cohn et al, (1989) that physiologically a woman can posses four different types of wavelength specific cones. Whether women in this position have the neural mechanisms to utilise an extra cone is more controversial. It has been shown behaviourally that women with four cones can be distinguished from women who have three, particularly by Jameson et al, (2001), and as this can be demonstrated behaviourally it implies that the women are having a different perceptual experience of colour than women who have three cones. It would also make sense for the visual system to adapt to an extra photopsin because the nervous system can change and update itself, and this has been demonstrated by Neitz et al, (2002). The fact that the extra photopsin is only six nanometres (Winderickx et al, 1992) away from the long wavelength specific cone suggests that if there are tetrachromats, as there appear to be, their colour vision is not likely to be much superior to a trichromats. As it has been shown by Jordan and Mollen, on simple behavioural tasks such as ratio matches there does not appear to be much difference at all. It is likely that cDa7 had a larger shift than the expected six nanometres to show tetrachromatic behaviour on these assessments. It appears conclusive that women can have four different wavelength specific cones, although the extent to which the extra is utilised and an advantage to colour vision still requires further investigation.