The 1903 formation of the Union of United Nobles and the Assembly of Russian Factory Workers marked a new development in Russian politics. Now groups were organising and coming together to enhance their awareness of each other's needs and grievances as well as to discuss possible actions to address them. Perhaps the most important of these organisations was the Union of Railway Workers, formed in late 1904; it had over 700 members and further bolstered these feelings of dissatisfaction and discontent. In August 1905, civil unrest was slowly gathering, and an idea that was steadily gaining support among workers, peasants and lower-middle classes was to take matters to the Tsar himself. 'On 5th January 1905 Father Gapon's march through the streets of St Petersburg ended in the massacre of unarmed workers....' Essentially this march was to present the Tsar with 'The Workers Petition'; it was hoped he would take note of their grievances and reform conditions. The march was peaceful, a symbol of hope that the Tsar would not be able to ignore, due to the appealing nature of having someone like Father Gapon - believed to have the Tsars blessing- speak for them. Its failure, 'Bloody Sunday', is probably the event that drew most attention to the campaign of 1905-06 and marks the beginning of the 1905 revolution.  From Bastille Day, armed uprisings in the countryside and the increased intensity of the civil unrest, caused the Tsar to take action. He suggested the formation of local legislatures and extensive reforms but promised not to take and drastic steps or ask the advice of the Duma. To many this was too little too late and revolutionary political parties became more and more organised. With radical socialists like Lenin, Trotsky and Martov organising party activities and the Socialist Revolutionaries, Mensheviks and Bolsheviks becoming organised officially into political parties, it seemed the revolution was gaining momentum. With the 'Manifesto of October 17th' the Tsar conceded to a Duma, albeit one with limited power. Martial law was used frequently in major urban centres with some success. After 1905 the number of strikes decreased and it seemed that the Tsar may have managed to quell the movement. However, the anti-government sentiment had increased, and intensified eventually culminating in the revolutions of 1917, in which the Tsar was overthrown.  Although the Tsar was eventually overthrown in 1917 and the aim of full revolution was achieved, by the time 1905 had finished the Tsar was still in position with only minor concessions made. Although the 1905 revolution was not the first of its kind in Russia, it did mark a new period of civil unrest; the only one to result in partial reform while the Tsar was still in power. Consequently, it has been argued by many historians, that the 1905 revolution was a failure as it did not lead to overthrowing of the Tsar. A variety of explanations on why this is the case have been given.  The first explanation is that the aims of the revolters simply were not to overthrow the Tsar, but rather to reform working conditions and coerce the Tsar in to introducing some kind of local democracy. It was never the aim of 1905 to bring about full and immediate revolution. For a consequence the concessions made in 1905 the October Manifesto it is argued were enough to satisfy the people and remove the need for further organised action. Furthermore, it is argued that the opposition to the Tsar at this time was not warned up enough to bring about full revolution