'The German invasion, launched at dawn on Sunday 22 June 1941, caught the Red Army almost fatally unprepared and the Soviet Union suffered catastrophic defeats." How was it possible for Soviet Russia to survive and defeat Germany? Many historians argue it was the power and morale of the people that lead to the victory. For example, Chris Ward says 'to put it another way the Great Patriotic War should be characterised as a people's war." How valid is this claim?
The role of the Soviet people's morale in the war's success is highly debated. Whilst David Read argues that 'the people's basic commitment to the struggle was crucial.' John Barber suggests that 'the Soviet relationship between government and people was imposed from above by the regime.' It is widely accepted that the involvement and support of the Soviet people was the critical factor that allowed Stalin to survive and eventually combine with his allies to defeat Germany. There are many aspects of the Soviet people's role in the war that can be considered. One these is the people's contribution to the economy, which required great will and endurance. People worked in defence production, and mines and when the Germans invaded Russia became an agrarian society. The people had to feed their own army.
The government created an efficient wartime economy. 'The war years witnessed the greatest triumph of Soviet planning." Almost 1,500 factories were moved in two months and 3,500 big new factories were built from scratch during the war Also, by 1945 Russia had more railway lines operating than at any time in their history. This required mass organisation and money. At its peak, more than half the national income was devoted to armaments. Work to complete the factories continued into the freezing night, requiring incredible endurance and therefore it is down to the Russian people that relocation and production were successful. 'In World War II the Soviet economy supplied the eastern front with tens of millions of soldiers and weapons. These soldiers and weapons destroyed Hitler's dream of a German empire in Europe." Rearmament was very fast. Munitions output doubled in 1942 and peaked in 1944. 'What won the war for the Allies, in the end, was their ability to produce munitions in greater - much greater - quantity than Germany and Japan." According to some historians, although the quality was similar, the sheer volume of products won the war for Russia. The volume of products created can be attributed to the hard work of the Soviet people, but also the Soviet government for organising the production line so effectively.
The government used Propaganda to raise morale. 'At the outbreak of War, the authorities launched a massive campaign to rally the people behind their leaders. The rebuilding of morale remained critical right until the end, particularly at times of crisis, such as the fall of Stalingrad in 1942, and again in late 1943 and early 1944 when the German forces were still on the offensive.
However, it could be argued that the Russian people were a resource; it was up to the government to use them efficiently. Without the government the people had no central control and thus no chance of organising themselves effectively in defence of Russia. The Soviet regime disregarded morals, was ruthless and used harsh repression to keep order during the war. If a minority were seen as siding with Germany then the whole community where the minority lived would be deported. The state would punish any soldiers who abandoned their positions. Absenteeism and lateness in defence industry factories were seen as crimes and mass overtime was demanded from offenders. Offenders could also be imprisoned from five to eight years. 'Brute force was applied, and not only to the enemy." Another way in which the state controlled the Russian people was concealing information from the public.
During the war the Soviet Union needed large numbers to fight and work in industry. The government forced men to join the war effort and drafted young men into the army. This had less of an effect on the country as a whole than expected as only 8 million out of a population of 170 million were in the army. The government severely punished those who did not defend Russia. For example, 'For everyone captured deserting or returning home without permission (the punishment) was shooting." This severe punishment was to ensure that Russian soldiers would fight harder in order to avoid execution. The civil population could also be punished for not defending the nation; some 200,000 people were arrested for 'defeatist activity." Even though the thirst for new recruits was desperate, there is still some respect to be given to the Russian people's effort as many individuals wanted to join the war effort voluntarily. Men volunteered so that their families could move to the rear and enjoy better accommodation; many actively sought to join the war effort. It is clear that the people had a strong desire for victory, for the most part people were glad to serve on the frontline; many saw it as a patriotic duty. This provides an indication as to why the defeated the Germans.
The government's role in the war cannot be underestimated; the leadership of Stalin, Zhukov and Vasievsky was necessary, but often overestimated. The 'new found effectiveness of the Red Army came from circumstances rather than from the ability of Stalin and his generals." It was another factor than Stalin's leadership that won the war. Stalin did not possess the military genius of Hitler. Stalin just needed to hold the line and keep the army together, using first Zhukov and then Vasievsky as the military commanders. Also, there was massive propaganda sending out a steady stream of highly emotional music, stirring speeches and dignified soldiers. This increased morale and accompanied with the fear of execution if they did not fight increased the commitment of Russians. Therefore it had a role in the war victory, although it was not significant. The propaganda was not effective in places like Leningrad where the people were in the middle of the siege and they saw nothing of what was going on elsewhere in the country. Thus it had most affect in areas where people remained and were not facing direct battle.
As well as the government raising morale and patriotism throughout Stalin's championing of Russia, posters and war films were used to raise morale in the population. 'To rally the people to their struggle against the invaders,… government propaganda swung into full action." True accounts of individual soldiers' heroic battles or suffering for the Motherland were told through newspapers and radio broadcasts. Posters were also designed to show the individual soldier other with patriotic slogans. Nationalist songs were an important way of boosting morale. Choirs sung patriotic songs for soldiers going to the front line. 'The communal singing of songs such as 'Smuglyanka' and 'Katysha' could reach dozens of trainloads of soldiers all at once.' This is effective because the main way of communication were through radios and posters. The songs allowed the Russian people to sing together and contributed to the united feeling of the nation.
The effort of the individual soldier was also vital. Every soldier had a struggle for survival. Propaganda was successful in installing national pride and hatred of the Nazis, which gave people motivation to fight and people were prepared to work harder and longer hours. People believed they were fighting for a better future for Russia, they wanted to escape the Great Terror. The people were highly motivated to win.
The economy was important to the war effort, but what really kept the war effort going was morals and hope. Transportation and housing of people to and from factories was created by the government. People did not just move their own factories, they moved entire towns. However, this is a vastly underrated achievement of the people. The government's five year plans meant the people had been trained to cope with organised chaos; the war effort was made possible by this.
However, the power and morale of the people is not the only factor which must be explored when evaluating why Russia was able to survive and defeat Germany.
Similarly, the Russians were able to cope with chaos and turn a disaster into a victory. This is illustrated by the evacuation of the factories to Russia's industrial hinterland. They had the capacity to achieve maximum production at minimum primary resources. This was due to the government's centralised planning. The government organised the entire economy in order to create military power. 'The government's control gave people the ability to respond and the power to dispose of any natural and human resource present in the country." This is evidence of the powerful government measures helping the war effort.
To some extent, however, the citizens of Russia had no real choice in the war; victory for Hitler would have been disastrous. It could be argued that for some Russians participating in war was a way of survival. Many Russians risk their lives every day for their country and this should not be underestimated.
The claim that the Great Patriotic War should be characterized as a people's war is very valid. The war effort needs to be seen as a combination of government and people. The government obviously provided leadership and policies for the movement of factories, the conscription of men and also won the war by creating a state of emergency throughout the country, which was occasionally enforced through repression. However, it was the people who made the war effort successful. They accepted the harsh government regulations and even though governed at a low-level, people still took their own initiative. The people worked hard, producing supplies and moving factories, as well as rebelling against the invading Germans. People's willingness to align themselves and cooperate with the national agenda cannot be underestimated.
The Russian people made an incredible effort. It is clear that the morale of the people was paramount in the victory over Germany; something even Stalin recognised as he eventually allowed religious services to be held saying that it provided 'some kind of spiritual tonic' for the soldiers. However, this was a two way process. The government had to change their policies for the population to contribute to the war. There was much collaboration between the state and the people in order for the war to be won, and the people supported the government's drive to rearm and produced munitions. For example, both government and people co-operated to build the Baikal-Amur railway, which was essential for the war effort. It took a combined effort of both the people and the government in order for the Russian's to win the war.
Overall, it appears that the morale of the people kept the war effort going. Although the government created the policies during the war and provided leadership, there is only so far that a government can go without the support of their people. Read discusses the movement of factories in Russia and says 'there was no way such tasks could have been achieved simply by pressing buttons at the centre. Immense hard work, dangerous and slow railway journeys (were required)." The Russian people seemed to truly believe they could win the war and thought they would have a better future if they won. Thus refused to give up through all the hardship they suffered. Garrard and Garrard conclude that 'this after all, was a "people's war" not a "Party war".'