The deterministic nature of this model undermines the significance of mortality and other factors upon population changes and upon shaping fertility. The relative instability and volatility of both fertility and mortality suggests more detail is needed in the model Wrigley and Schofield provide. Evidence such as those registers not used in Mortality in the form of starvation was often extremely hard to identify due to its lack of recording in parish registers. The type of scarcity which never developed in to full blown famine is even harder to spot, but was equally influential in shaping fertility and population. Studies of Westmorland and Cumberland, the Forest of Arden and of Mid-Wharfedale parishes reveal a mistaken and repeated underplaying of starvation, and its often very localised nature. In fact the presence and at times domination of mortality was important and deserves more attention in Similarly, although I have not focused greatly upon the influence of migration and in particular sex specific migration on population trends, through reducing the pool of those eligible for marriage, its importance should not be underestimated either. Each affected the others and each in turn was affected by many other minor demographic variables. Therefore I have suggested that a model whereby the essential interlinks of mortality, migration and fertility would prove most accurate. Hatcher claims that in total between 1551 and 1751 'fertility is dominant for 17.5 percent of the time, mortality for 32.5 percent and for 50 percent of the time the two variables exerted approximately equal influence." Manifestly he argues that causality cannot be established until it is accepted that fertility and mortality were both important factors within the early modern period '...and a host of social, cultural and economic factors played on them to help fashion demographic behaviour." To finally answer the question, I would suggest that the metaphor of fertility as a 'hinge upon which the demographic regime turned', be discarded and replaced with a metaphor which better encompasses the historical reality of the exertion of manifold influences, and a co-relation of factors which developed to shape what was infact less a regime, and more a volatile commune. 'Any valid depiction of reality is likely to resemble a vast irregular web'. 'Patterns of births, marriages, deaths and migrations helped to shape society and economy and were themselves shaped by society and economy' as I have attempted to show in this essay.