It has long been recognised that emotions exert powerful effects on memory, and that what we feel can strongly influence what we remember. The types of effects that emotion can have on memory differ markedly, depending on the precise conditions of encoding and retrieval (Eich, Kihlstrom, Bower, Forgas & Miedenthal, 2000). Differences in emphasis during encoding, for example, can have a profound effect on how, or indeed whether, information is remembered later (Gleitman, 1999) and similarly, the emotional state of a person at the time of retrieval may influence what they remember. Two central questions have arisen out of the study of the impact of emotion on memory; firstly, whether emotion increases or decreases the strength of memory for an event, and secondly, whether special mechanisms are required to account for the effects of emotion on memory (Eich et al, 2000). This essay will examine ways in which people's memories are affected by their feelings, and will also investigate models put forward as explanations as to why emotion has such an influence on memory.
Our emotions are very often entwined with the memories they provoke; whether a particular memory is encoded strongly and in detail, or is repressed, is often dependant on the emotion associated with it. As Eysenck and Keane (2000) note, "there are undoubtedly cases in which emotionally charged material is better remembered than neutral material". In addition, our present emotional state will also influence the memories we retrieve and so can also affect the remembering of emotional events from the past.
Flashbulb memories are autobiographical memories, which are typically vivid and detailed, for instance, where or with whom the person was when they heard the news, and how they felt afterwards (Brown & Kulik, 1977). Researchers have suggested that an initial emotional reaction to news of an unexpected and especially dramatic event profoundly affects the amount and type of information acquired (Thompson, 1988, summarized in Eich et al, 2000). Brown and Kulik (1977, as cited in Eich et al, 2000) proposed a number of processes that might occur, one of which is selective attention. In this way, visual or auditory information that is directly or tangentially affected by the event is filtered out from the environment by attention selectively being oriented to the flashbulb event, thus acquiring information that is stored in memory. Subsequently, subjects may repeat the details of the event to themselves, thus strengthening the memory, or recall one element of the event that seems more salient to them than others, thus forming an 'edge' to the memory. Subsequently, people ask themselves, over time, 'What was I doing when I heard that..?' then continuing to recall more context to the event, thus enriching their memory for the event. Brown and Kulik (1977, as cited in Eich et al, 2000) reported that the most long lasting, detailed and precise flashbulb memories occurred in response to highly emotional, personally relevant events, as in the case of President Kennedy's assassination, and they suggested that the strength of retrospectively reported emotions of surprise and shock produced by the event acts as an 'emotional tag' that closes off this kind of memory three days after the event. Part of the evidence for the processes postulated by Brown and Kulik is that their detail levels of their flashbulb accounts have been shown, with evidence of greater accuracy for facts directly associated with the event than facts related to the context in which these facts were experienced (Hirst, Luddeke & Frison, 1988, as cited in Eich et al , 2000). Further evidence in support of the idea of a flashbulb memory is a replication of the same experiment, involving two groups of citizens from two different cities, one close to and the other distant from the Challenger explosion, by Conway et al (1990, as cited in Eich et al, 2000). It was observed that memory accuracy was highest in those close to the disaster, although the selective attention hypothesis proposes that the effects should be equal for both affected and unaffected, since attention should be affected mainly by the event itself, rather than the physical location of the respondent (Eich et al, 2000). One potential explanation of this differential is that subjects who experienced the event from afar were also more affected by media input about the event, and were thus more reactive than those close up, perhaps due to the prominent lead-in of effects of shock associated with the event (Conway et al, 1990, as cited in Eich et al, 2000). Furthermore, memory accuracy appeared to be enhanced if the person had some emotional attachment to the event; for example, many remembered the location of their parents when they heard the news (Eich et al, 2000). It appears then, that even though the impact of the emotional response to a dramatic and unexpected event on memory is initially very strong, the effect does appear to decay over time.
In contrast to the postitive influence on encoding in terms of flashbulb memory, powerful negative emotions may also potentially ongregate encoding of unpleasant events and induce forgetting or repression. It is proposed that the emotion of fear or anxiety could be an aversive stimulus, leading to conscious avoidance of a potentially dangerous situation (Wegner, 1994). This mechanism supports one of the most common non-technical words for emotional memory loss; represssion. Freud first introduced this concept in 1896, and subsequent empirical evidence has annealed Freud's dual systems approach; the notion of conscious, cognitive control on one hand, and involuntary, unconscious priming on the other (Wegner, 1994). Freud did not advocate forgetting of all unpleasant memories; he proposed that some events were so threatening that in order to cope with such experiences, people must develop two levels of control; one involves the conscious cognitive control of distaste or disgust which leads to avoidance, whereas the other involves unconscious processes by which the unpleasantness of an experience is forgotten (Jones, 1998). It has been argued that repression of traumatic memories is a very natural process, due to the way in which cognitive capabilities are exercised to protect the individual (Wegner, 1972). Wegner (1994) proposed two levels of voluntary conscious control; 'thought suppression' where events were simply consciously avoided, and 'interspersal', where ideas to be forgotten are 'buried' by concentrating on alternative, more pleasant, remembering tasks. Further evidence for the existence of repressed memories comes from studies of the accuracy of eyewitness testimony. Both Loftus and Ketcham (1991, as cited in Eich et al, 2000) and Loftus, Miller and Burns (1978; 1979 as cited in Eich et al ,2000) concluded that memory for personally experienced, potentially traumatic events can be notoriously inaccurate. In addition, it is generally accepted (Leenheer, van Berkel & Perrin, 1988, as cited in Eich et al, 2000) that if something has previously been imprinted in a person's memory and then forgotten due to psychological factors such as repression or dissociation, people's memories are often forgotten rather than replaced by new memories. The idea of psychologically induced forgetting therefore appears to be a credible mechanism.
The mood-state-dependent memory hypothesis by Bower (1981) provides further support for the notion that emotion has an effect on memory. This hypothesis suggests that both our moods and our memories are closely connected, so that the emotional context in which we experience and store information can affect our memory for it. Baddeley (1997) explains that this hypothesis implies two distinct effects; firstly this effect that a subject's current mood may have on his/her retrieval of information; memories recalled will be congruent with the individual's current mood, for example pleasant memories when the subject is in a good mood and unpleasant memories when the person is in a bad mood - this is known as mood congruent retrieval; as well as the effect mood has on learning and subsequent memory; the mood of the individual may affect the strength of memory for an event - this is known as mood-state-dependent learning (Eysenck & Keane, 2000).
The hippocampus is thought to be important for the formation of some emotional memories, in particular fearful ones (Lee, Winter, Green & Davidson, 1995, as cited in Eysenck & Keane, 2000). This was demonstrated by Cahill and McGaugh (1995, as cited in Eysenck & Keane, 2000) who trained animals using mild electric shocks and then administered an amnesic drug, scopolamine. They discovered that inhibition of the hippocampus led to a reduction in the emotional effects, in terms of both behaviour and conditioned physiological responses. Similarly, other researchers showed that impairment of the hippocampus reduced the emotional response in monkeys (O'Keefe, 1986, as cited in Eysenck & Keane, 2000). Thus there appears to be some evidence that fear can be encoded in the hippocampus and although it does not seem to be the sole structure involved, its involvement does indicate that emotion and memory are closely connected within the brain.
From these findings, two models have emerged to explain the impact of emotion on memory. The first is the emotion-as-information hypothesis of Berntson (1992, as cited in Eich et al, 2000), which proposes that emotion can act as an easy-to-process cue, and that when emotion is present during encoding, it speeds up the retrieval of saliently encoded strong memories. This theory suggests that memories are processed as a whole, and when emotion is present, it acts as an indicator of the importance of the information, thus the emotional context enhances learning (Baddeley, 1997).
To conclude, there is a considerable body of evidence suggesting that emotion affects our memory, both in terms of its encoding and subsequent accessibility when later retrieving information from memory. The observation of flashbulb memories has demonstrated how emotionally intense events can be encoded in strong and vivid memories. In contrast, theories of repression suggest that powerful negative emotions can lead to repression of memories, or may cause people to forget embarrassing or painful events. Similarly, mood congruent retrieval highlights how emotional states may affect the recall of affectively congruent information, whilst theories of mood-state-dependent learning suggest that when people are in the same mood as at the time of encoding, memories are then more easily retrievable. In order to explain these effects, Bower put forward associative network theory, adapted later to include the causal belonging hypothesis.
It is therefore clear that our memories are influenced by our feelings in numerous different ways. Memories with strong emotional associations can be either encoded strongly and in much detail, or repressed, whilst both the emotional tone of material and a person's mood state can affect what is later remembered. For this reason there is much evidence to support the idea that emotion and cognition are closely connected