The ideal speech situation devised by Habermas was intended to make people realise firstly that they were infact following an ideology, then to help them think outside it in a less positivistic way. He suggested that this could only happen in a doctor / patient type of situation, where outside influences are shut out and the patient is the ultimate arbiter of how accurate the analyst is. This situation should be transferred over in to social situations, thus providing everyday chances for everyday people to look beyond technocratic consciousness. (Outhwaite, 1994; 54). This suggestion was met with heavy criticism; it was argued that not everyone (for example our housewife with the small child) could achieve such a situation. Likewise it was argued that even if this kind of situation were to be achieved, the patient may believe to know their underlying problems, but infact be deluded. Finally, it was put forward that this theory, even if it worked, was dubious as an emancipatory salvation. (Outhwaite, 1994; 55). In reaction to such criticism Habermas revised his suggestion; arguing that if there was a However, the circular potentials of this were not lost on Habermas's critics; not only was this a harder situation to achieve, but it could simply result in deluded people deluding each other further. Only in an already emancipated society could critical reflection produce truth. (Layder, 1994; 189). Yet Habermas still maintained that the ideal speech situation was necessary to arrive at the truth. Habermas explained that this ideal speech situation would begin with intellectuals, who were emancipated through education, providing the model towards which education might lead society as a whole. Whether this situation would lead to emancipation, whether intellectuals are infact emancipated (those controlling education usually control dominant ideologies), and whether this transformation of the micro to the macro, would in reality be achievable, has been the subject of much heated debate.