High levels of avoidance coping have consistently been found to be predictive of problem drinking, which is highest among young adults. Students in particular have greatly elevated levels of drinking in comparison to the general population. One hundred undergraduates were asked about the way they cope with a high academic workload. Alcohol consumption was found to correlate positively with avoidance coping and negatively with seeking social support. Thus students who attempt to disengage and forget about their problems, and those who do not like to seek help or confide in others, are typically those with higher levels of alcohol consumption. Further research could investigate whether high levels of alcohol consumption avoidance coping significantly impact academic achievement.
Research Essay  The Relationship between Avoidance Coping and Alcohol Use: A Study of university Students Coping with Academic Workload
Broadly speaking, coping is traditionally divided into two categories; problem-focused coping and emotion-focused coping. Problem-focused coping is defined in terms of managing specific external demands or internal sensations, with one's efforts being focused primarily on problem-solving processes. Emotion-focused coping, on the other hand, is seen as involving regulating the emotional responses to a stressful situation so as to minimise distress. This may include strategies such as avoiding, denying, distancing, blaming or accepting blame, as well as using cognitive and behavioural strategies to manipulate subjective and objective appraisals of the situation (Folkman & Lazarus, 1986; Finkenauer & Engels, 2002). In general, problem-focused coping is regarded as a healthier style of responding to stress than emotion-focused coping. Those who employ emotion-focused coping are typically viewed as engaging in maladaptive behaviour and avoidant patterns of reacting (Folkman, Lazarus, Gruen & DeLongis, 1986). It is widely assumed that heavy reliance on avoidance coping leads to poorer adjustment, greater vulnerability to stress, and poorer physical and mental well-being (Moos & Schaefer, 1981; Pearlin & Schooler, 1978; Wills, 1979).
It has therefore been concluded that emotion-focused strategies tend to be maladaptive. This has major implications since emotion-focused coping is generally invoked much more often than less avoidance-oriented strategies in response to stress (Lazarus & Folkman, 1984), suggesting that if emotion-focused strategies are indeed maladaptive in certain circumstances then many people may be more likely to experience psychological distress. However, it should also be mentioned that a deficiency in emotion-focused coping strategies is also likely to be damaging; indeed, it appears that it is not simply the use of emotion-focused strategies, but their inefficient use that is maladaptive (Eckenrode, 1984; Jones, Skovholt & Ferguson, 1988). It is therefore somewhat difficult to discern the exact nature and level of emotion-focused coping that is necessary for adaptive functioning in response to certain stressful situations for an individual.
An area of growing interest which does indicate the potential negative implications of emotion-focused avoidance coping, however, is that of alcohol consumption and abuse, and it is within this area that the present study is focused. It is a widespread belief that alcohol serves to reduce tension and anxiety in an individual, with this theory being formalised in Conger's tension-reduction hypothesis (1956, cited in Erickson, 2004). The tension-reduction hypothesis is supported by physiological evidence which indicates that alcohol functions to depress central nervous activity and leads to decreased cortical arousal, resulting in a decrease in tension anxiety (Schwarz, Burkhart & Green, 1978), and by other numerous studies that have shown that alcohol reduces both physiological and psychological responsivity to stressful situations (Stasiewicz & Lisman, 1995; Hull & Young, 1983; Levenson, Sher, Grossman, Newman & Newlin, 1980). However, it remains unclear whether the effect is a function of alcohol's impact on tension per se or cognisance of the stressor (Hull, 1981), and some studies have found that alcohol actually serves to increase self-reported anxiety. Evidence for the model is therefore mixed.
Over recent years research into the link between emotional processes and alcohol consumption has burgeoned, and as a result we now have a greater understanding of the complex processes driving alcohol consumption in society. One such example of the sorts of emotional processes that have been studied in depth in this context is that of stress and coping. It has been noted by a number of researchers that, in certain individuals, problem-focused coping styles become less useful and even dysfunctional when faced with stress that is deemed 'unmanageable', and may even be replaced by 'escapist' or 'avoidant' coping responses (Theorell & Melen, 1982). Golding (1993), for example, found that preoccupation coping, one of the sub-scales of the Ways of Coping Questionnaire (Folkman & Lazarus, 1985), was the only coping style found to significantly anticipate alcohol consumption in her sample of individuals. Furthermore, Christensen, Sher & Huston (1987) established a positive relationship between high levels of escapist coping and the likelihood of engaging in problem drinking. Theoretically this supports the notion that alcohol is used as a means of avoiding complex emotions that cannot be managed in a useful way with problem-focused coping strategies (Rabow, 1999).
In the present study we were particularly concerned with the relationship between avoidance coping and alcohol consumption with respect to how university students cope with a high academic workload. It is widely acknowledged that university students represent a group of individuals who have unique drinking patterns (O'Hare, 1997). Drinking is a large part of university culture, and heavy or problematic drinking among students represents a major public health concern (Ham & Hope, 2003), with young adults aged 18-24 showing the highest rates of alcohol use and having the greatest percentage of problem drinkers in the population (Rabow & Duncan-Schill, 1995). However, at the same time university students are frequently confronted by stressful periods when they have a large amount of work to do, with assignments to complete, deadlines to meet and exams to prepare for. This poses a potential problem since their generally high levels of drinking suggest that university students may be particularly likely to exhibit avoidance coping in stressful situations, and thus, if alcohol fosters the use of avoidant coping to such an extent that more adaptive coping strategies such as active problem solving are excluded, it may lead to maladaptive functioning in important life domains such as academic achievement (Windle & Windle, 1996). A positive correlation between levels of avoidance coping and alcohol consumption may therefore suggest that individuals who drink more at university are more likely to deny the importance of work they have to do, perhaps leave it until the last minute, and subsequently exhibit lower grades than those who drink less and are subsequently more able to employ more successful problem-focused strategies.
Our study establishes new data in the area of coping because, to our knowledge, there have been no other studies focusing on avoidance coping and alcohol consumption specifically within the student population. Furthermore, our study differs from many others in the fact that we focus purely on one area - that of academic workload - when the vast majority of coping studies ask participants to specify a particular event of their choice that they found stressful, and analyse responses and coping strategies used in terms of whether the situation was appraised as changeable or unchangeable. We decided to structure our study in this manner because a general link between alcohol consumption and the use of avoidant coping strategies has already been established, and we therefore wanted to see if this general conclusion would apply to one specific situation with which all students are familiar. We feel this issue is of particular relevance since drinking alcohol and working are arguably the two main activities that dominate the lives of many students, and our results may provide preliminary evidence indicating that excessive alcohol consumption may be detrimental to the attitudes of students towards academic work.
Methods Participants Participants were 100 undergraduate psychology students from a small university in the North West of England. All subjects were aged between 18 and 25, with a mean age of 19.73. There were 58 female participants and 42 males.  Materials The material used in this study was a beer bong, ten large shot glasses, an Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT), and a Ways of Coping Questionnaire (WOCQ) (Folkman and Lazarus, 1988). The beer bong was used to measure actual alcohol consumption, with participants being required to consume one can of beer each. The amount of beer initially poured was measured using a shot glass and all those who completed the beer bong were given a 10ml shot of whiskey. The AUDIT was used to ascertain levels of alcohol consumption and the WOCQ was used to assess coping styles.  Procedure Participants were informed that they were going to take part in a study investigating student drinking behaviour. They were given a copy of the AUDIT to complete before the actual drinking games. The AUDIT was followed by the group beer bong game. When this was completed, participants were given a ten ml shot of tequila and instructed to complete the WOCQ.  Results
Initial data screening using a boxplot indicated that there were four outliers in the raw data. One had a particularly low score on the 'planful problem solving scale', one on the 'seeking social support' scale, and the other two particularly high scores on the 'self isolation' scale. The data from these subjects was subsequently removed from the study due to the potential disproportionate influence they may have had on results obtained. All analysis was carried out with these outliers removed. There was no missing data in the data set.
An ANOVA was used to compare mean scores on the 'planful problem solving', 'seeking social support', 'tension reduction', 'denial', 'self isolation', 'positive reappraisal' and 'distancing' sub-scales between heavy and light drinkers. The results of this analysis are shown in Table 1:
Table 1 makes it quite apparent that with the exception of the 'planful problem solving' sub-scale, heavy drinkers did show higher scores on each of the coping sub-scales than did light drinkers, although the difference is not large. It is notable that the differences in mean scores on the 'distancing', 'self-blame', 'avoidance', and 'tension reduction' sub-scales, particularly, are all somewhat subtle
The standard deviations are, with the exception of 'planful problem solving' and 'tension reduction', higher for heavy drinkers than light drinkers; however, for the most part the difference in standard deviations between the two groups is not large. Heavier drinkers thus simply appear to be slightly more variable in the extent to which they use particular coping strategies.
However, to test further the hypothesis that a relationship exists between levels of alcohol consumption and levels of avoidance coping a Pearson Correlation Coefficient test was then used. The correlation between variables may in this way be tested to see if such a pattern of results indeed exists (Straub, 1998). The results of this analysis are shown in Table 2
Table 2 illustrates that there are a number of significant correlations in the results obtained, consisting of both inter-correlations between sub-scales of the Ways of Coping Questionnaire and correlations between scores on particular sub-scale with AUDIT scores.
Given that the data obtained is inter-correlated, it was decided, in order to test for the extent to which scores on the sub-scales of the Ways of Coping Questionnaire are, as predicted, associated with scores on the AUDIT, that a Pearson correlation co-efficient test should be carried out. This measure is used to evaluate the strength of the linear correlation between two continuous variables; it produces a numerical co-efficient of correlation which ranges from +1 (indicating a perfect positive correlation) to -1 (indicating a perfect negative correlation), with values close to 0 indicating only a weak correlation between the two variables. The results of the Pearson correlation co-efficient test are shown in both Table 2 (above), and in the scattergraphs presented below. As can be seen from Table 2, several correlations are significant, most falling somewhere between ±0.2 and ±0.3. In all cases these correlations are quite weak on a scale of ±1.0, providing evidence that the level to which emotions-focused and problem-focused coping strategies are used by an individual is largely independent of the level to which the other strategies are used. Furthermore, the fact that all of the inter-correlations fall somewhere in the lower half of the ±1.0 range illustrates that there is only a weak association between the various strategies used.
Overall, the results from the Ways of Coping Questionnaire appear to be quite significant and generally provide strong evidence that those individuals drinking at hazardous levels are more likely to rely on emotion-focused coping, and in particular on avoidance coping, when confronted by a stressful situation such as an overload of academic work, than those who are drinking at lower levels. It should be noted however that the degree to which people rely on avoidance coping also varies, since although heavy drinkers scored more highly than light drinkers on the distancing scale, they did not score uniformly highly on all of the pure emotion-focused scales, thus indicating that the way people cope in stressful situations varies widely, even between heavy and light drinkers.
Regression analysis was employed to further explore the correlation between AUDIT and sub-scales of the Ways of Coping Questionnaire. The purpose of the regression analysis was to examine which of the coping sub-scales are most predictive of AUDIT score. The regression
Figure 1 clearly illustrates the significant positive correlation between these two variables. There is a large amount of scatter on the graph, which is to be expected given that the number of observations (N = 95) is relatively small, with the relationship one of association rather than causation. It is nonetheless possible to detect the overall trend in the data.
Figure 2 depicts the negative correlation between AUDIT score and seeking social support score. Again, there is a considerable amount of scatter on the graph and it is arguably harder to detect the presence of a significant negative relationship between the two variables from the graph alone. This may be due to the fact that the maximum score on this sub-scale is only 15, resulting in less possible variation between participants in terms of their score and thus less potential for such a strong negative correlation to emerge. Whilst still significant therefore, this correlation does not appear to be as strong as that between AUDIT and distancing score, a fact which is confirmed by their respective co-efficient values.