Results show that all three hypotheses were supported by the data gathered. Analysis firstly showed a significant main effect of distraction condition, meaning that the inhibition times of children were significantly higher when a distracting cartoon was played than when the room was quiet throughout, suggesting that the distracting event did impair children's attention performance. More specifically, analysis confirmed that inhibition times of boys was significantly higher than that of girls in both distraction conditions, supporting the theory that boys were more distracted than girls by the cartoon and earlier findings that boys have poorer attention skills than girls of a similar age. Whilst initial ANOVA results gave no indication of age effects, a planned linear contrast over age was significant, suggesting that as age increases, attentional performance will increase so inhibition times decreased overall, this was particularly significant in the distraction condition (p=0.000 compared to p=0.017)) suggesting that age affects inhibition times more when a distracting event occurs, however there were no age-sex interactions found. Whilst an interaction effect between sex and distraction condition was observed, the significance level was not low enough to be completely confident (p=0.035) therefore further or repeated research would be advantageous to rule out the possibility of a type I error. Again, post hoc age group comparisons revealed a slightly significant difference between the 4-5 and the 8-9 age groups, but given that the probability level was 0.046 and the large number of comparisons made, a chance level of probability cannot be ruled out, therefore the result should be ignored until proven in further research. In general, mean scores were much as expected, with distraction scores higher than no distraction scores, and scores tending to decrease (improve) with age, however the mean distraction inhibition score for 8-9 year old boys was higher than expected (15.50) and was, in fact, the largest inhibition time found. Since there were no outliers in this group it is difficult to conclude why the times were this high, and a design problem can never be ruled out. Repeat experiments would be useful in determining any cause for this result. As expected though, the lowest inhibition times were generally found in the oldest girls tested, in both conditions.