In this assignment, researches have been done on the types of engines that are usually used for racing. The four types of racing engines that was of interest were the Formula, Rally, Sports and Motorcycle racing engines. The specifications of these engines have been summarized in Appendix A and B so that one can compare their important parameters. Appendix A shows all the racing engines, of which their individual performance will be discuss in the content of this report. Appendix B is a table which accumulates all the information obtained about the four racing engine requirement and their overall comparisons are also included in the main text. In this report, we also accessed past and future developments of each of these racing engines.
In 1894, the idea of car racing was raised once a series of petrol-fuelled cars were constructed. The first official race was held in Chicago, Illinois on 2nd November in 1895 and racing engines were improved exponentially during the 20
Researches on different engines which usually used in racing were performed and discussed in this report. Engine used for general automotives was internal combustion (I.C.) engine in which the mechanical power of vehicle was produced by combustion of fuel within the combustion chamber. Internal combustion engine could have either two-strokes or four-strokes and either spark ignites or compression ignites. Gasoline, diesel and natural gas could be selected as the fuel in a SI engine.
In Convention Internal Combustion Engines (CI engines), fuel and air were mixed together in the combustion chamber and ignited by spark plug. Such engines use either gasoline or diesel as the fuel (including natural gas). The widely used gasoline engines were mainly consisted of Otto Cycle and the most common petrol engine type was SI engine. Types of Engines/Cycles In 1900s, various types of engines were invented such as diesel engine, rotary engine and Wankel engine (It got its name from its inventor Felix Wankel). Diesel engines used compression ignition, they were mainly used in large vehicles due to its unique features such as the higher compression ratio can provide high torque output and better fuel economy.  Rotary engines (Rotary combustion engines, RCE) were first developed by Felix Wankel. It was a type of combustion engine which was consists of rotor which is consist of three apex forming an equilateral triangle instead of a traditional pistons and a co-axial cylinder. It used mixture of air and fuel to run the engine but the operating principle was different from the conventional engine. RCEs could had advantages such as higher thermal efficiency, lighter and more compact design and lower nitrogen oxide emission.
However, the development of Wankel engine was suspended in most of the companies due to the arising environmental regulations as well as the effect of the oil crisis. The most recent car operated by Wankel engine was the Mazda RX-7 which produced in 1999.
In automotive racing industry, only particular specifications were selected and employed since the efficiency could only be improved by such specifications. Different cylinder configurations such as single, in-line, v-type, w-type, u-type, opposed cylinder, opposed piston and radial could be found in IC engines. However, in-line and v-type were the most commonly used configurations in automotive racing engines. Further more, the common numbers of valves employed in each cylinder were 2 (1 intake, 1 exhaust), 4 (2 intake, 2 exhaust) and 5 (3 intake, 2 exhaust). Generally 4 valves were employed in racing engine.
. Compare to normal engines, limits such as peak operating cylinder pressure were pushed up in some racing engines so that a higher performance could be obtained. Besides, the horsepower and fuel economy could be increased by maximizing the cylinder pressure. Although the cylinder pressure could be increased by increasing the compression ratio, alternative technique could also be used since cylinder pressures could be altered significantly by using camshaft selection, carburetion, nitrous and supercharging. Compression pressures could be adjusted drastically by installing supercharging, turbo-charging or intercooling system. However, apart from installing extra equipment to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of racing engines, the durability and lifetime were also a significant factor to consider since racing cars might require to operation for a long time without any failures
In the report, a series of engines used in different automotive racings including formula racing, rally racing, sports racing (including endurance) and motorcycle racing were presented. In fact, the features required in racing engine were totally depended on types of racing and performances of different racing engine were adjusted in order to meet the specific purpose and provide a best fit performance. However, high acceleration, high maximum speed, high power, high torque, light weight and high efficiency of engine cycles were generally the ideal for racing engines. For instance, high power output was necessary for rally engine since such racing might consist of climbing uphill or operating under poor conditions. To conclude, particular engine performance could be adjusted in accordance with racing course conditions and requirements.
Additional features could be employed in different racing engines so that the performance could be improved further. Forced induction systems such as turbocharger and supercharger were explained as well as cooling systems and carburetor.
1. Turbocharger - An apparatus to boost the horsepower of engine without significantly increased its weight, operated by pressurizing the air flowing into the engine's cylinders in order to get more fuel to be burnt during each stroke. Advantage of compressing the air was more air could be squeezed into a cylinder, hence more fuel could be added and more power could be obtained from each explosion in each cylinder. More overall power could be produced than the same engine without the charging (Figure 7).
2. Supercharger - A device to force air into the engine's cylinder, operated with the turbine in the exhaust manifold. By doing so, more air than normal could be supplied into the cylinders, hence more fuel could also added to the cylinder. This leads to the more force being applied to the pistons and eventually boost the power of engines (Figure 8).
3. Cooling systems - Either liquid-cooled or air-cooled technique was generally employed in racing engines.
i) Liquid-cooling: Fluid flowed through pipes and ducts within the engine, heat was absorbed by the fluid and engine was cooled as the liquid passed through. The fluid was then passed through a heat exchanger or radiator and heat was transferred from the fluid to the air blowing through the exchanger.
ii) Air-cooling: An old-fashioned cooling technique, engine block was covered in aluminum fins rather than circulating fluid through the engine so that heat could be conducted away from the cylinder. A powerful fan was used to force air over these fins and the engine was cooled by transferring the heat to air.
In this report, researches were done on the types of engines that are usually used for racing. The four types of racing engines discussed are formula, rally, sports and motorcycle racing engines. The Report discussed and compared the four different engines and their individual performances and parameters. The report also discussed and compared the past and future development of the engines. The past developments of the Wankel Engine and Supercharging Techniques were discussed and new technologies were also mentioned such as turbocharging and cooling systems that can be added to the racing engines to increase performance. Finally, the report discussed the materials used in the engine components and how they can affect the performance of the engine. In conclusion, the report discussed the types of engines used in racing and their individual performances. It also discussed the past and future development of these engines, as well as the materials used in them that can affect performance. According to the report, the performance of the engine can be improved by using turbochargers, supercharging techniques, cooling systems and using light weight materials for the engine components.
In an internal combustion engine with multiple (more than one) cylinders, the cylinders and piston could have V-, in-line, horizontal, w type, opposed piston and radial configuration. The most common configurations used in racing engines are the V- and in-line configurations.
Sports racings consisted of a variety of competitions between modified cars and were normally taken place on a specific racing course. Due to the enormous area sports racings have covered, only endurance racing was mentioned in this report.
Rally engines were required to operate effectively even under poor conditions such as in swamps (water resistance), dirt and on snowy surfaces. The engine also needed to generate sufficient power in order to drive the rally car uphill. Two rally engines were shown below:
Formula racing engines are used in many types of racing, such as Formula 1, Formula 2 and Formula 3. Each engine should comply with the regulations such as intake, exhaust, maximum displacement, total weight and numerical of cylinders limits for their uses in Formula 1 racing. All formula racing engines had to be naturally aspirated and at least two camshafts could have been used. Normally a V10 engine (Figure 4) was used in Formula-1 racing since the regulation of FIA has determined the maximum numerical of cylinders is 10 and the cylinder should have a 90° angle between them.
Formula and rally racings usually use internal combustion engines (IC) whether it is single-cylinder, two-cylinder, four-cylinder, six-cylinder or ten-cylinder configurations. In-line and V-type configurations are the most common used. The power output of each engine is different.
The numerical data for the engines' torques and compression ratios (CR) are not available in all of the sources. This may because these data have to remain confidential. Following are some examples Formula-1 racing engines:
Motorcycle racing is a variety of sports involving motorcycles competing with each other. Some common examples of motorcycle racings are Isle of Man TT (road racing), MotoGP (circuit racing), Daytona (endurance racing) etc. Engines of motorcycles are gasoline engines and can be either two strokes or four strokes.
They either use fuel injection or carburetors to feed the fuel-air mixture into the combustion chamber. Motorcycles used for racing are mostly four-stroke engines with multiple cylinders. The power of an engine depends on the number and sizes of its cylinders. Therefore, increasing the sizes and number of cylinders in an engine would increase its power, i.e. increase the engine's displacement.
Motorcycles engines at present can have single-cylinder, two-cylinder, four-cylinder or six-cylinder and their displacements ranges from 250 cc to over 1500 cc. Most motorcycles nowadays often have two or four-cylinder engines. Engines with high displacement have higher fuel consumption and therefore generate more power. A multiple cylinder engine can have its cylinders arranged in horizontal, inline or V configurations. As mentioned beforehand, the main problems with V configuration engines were its vibrations and high centre of mass. Among the three configurations, the horizontal configuration has the best weight distribution (lower centre of gravity) and also produced the least vibrations. The following is an example of a racing motorcycle:
From the above information, one can completed the performance comparison table in Appendix A. For the missing data such as torque of racing engine, estimates and assumptions were made and detailed as follows:  Formula: torque ≈ 500 lb-ft  Rally: torque ≈ 400 lb-ft  Sports: torque ≈500 lb-ft  Motorcycle: torque ≈ 150 lb-ft
Firstly, all the displacements of formula and rally racing were very closed to 3000cc and 2000cc respectively, however the maximum possible values for those racing vehicle should be larger since those performances were achieved under some racing regulations. On the other hand, the torque and compression ratio of formula racing engines as well as the compression ratio of rally racing engines were missing on the table due to those performance might be confidential to public. In formula racing V10 engine were normally used since the racing engine could only consist 10 cylinders in accordance with formula racing regulation. Most of the rally engines were employing inline configuration except for Subaru Impreza since a more efficient flat configuration was used.
In sports racing, endurance racing engine usually has higher displacements between (3000-7000cc). Endurance vehicles consists of higher displacement 4-stroke engines equipped with corresponding transmission systems. The engines had to be lightweight and more durable since endurance vehicles need to operate up to 6, 12 or 24 hours on a runway.  In motorbike racing, the racing engine should have high power output, light weight and also lower fuel consumption so that a greater torque could be obtained in the engine. The commonly used number of cylinders was either two or four complemented with a suitable transmission system. Although V-configuration engines generated greater performance, fairing was normally used for weight reduction so that the centre of mass was not significantly increased. In addition, the V-configuration should be abandoned since they were prone to produce greater vibrations .
Although the torque of formula engine was not available, the expected torque of formula engine should be greater than the Ford GT (500lb-ft).
Figure 7: Schematic of Turbocharger. Figure 8a: Schematic of Supercharger. Figure 8b: Illustration of power with and without Supercharger.
In conclusion, the performances of different racing engines were totally depended on the type of race. For instance endurance vehicle would require a high displacement whereas a motorcycle would not since endurance race needed a larger capacity of fuel. Besides, the performance could be improved by inserting extra components such as turbocharger and cooler, by modifying/replacing the current components or by either employing specific valve configuration in order to lower the centre of gravity of the vehicle.
Light weight and high strength material such as aluminium alloy could also be used so that a lighter but stiffer product could be achieved.
The future development of these racing engines would be tends to increase the horsepower by developing new systems to assist the current operations. Improvements of racing engine could also be achieved by developing individual components such as piston, crankshaft, camshaft, head cover...etc.