The report consisted of the design and analysis of a commercial meat slicer, which connected between an AC motor with speed of 1800rpm and a grinder with an output speed of ~90rpm. A variety of calculations would be performed for different major components. Computer program would also be used in order to compare the results from computer modeling to manual calculations. A computer aid design drawing would be conducted and presented near the final stage and an appropriate size of gearbox housing would be designed.
In the design process, a number of analyses were carried out in order to achieve an optimal gearbox design for a commercial meat slicer. The manual calculations were carried out smoothly and a number of gear combinations were investigated. Appropriate components such as gears, shafts, bearings and housing were selected and examined under different conditions. The optimal output was determined through detailed analysis so that the bending and surface stress conditions were met. A spreadsheet was also created in order to summarize the possible arrangements. On the other hand, the shafts were designed based on the optimal gear parameters. where the bending moment diagrams and shear force diagrams were constructed in order to perform analysis on bending. Computer program would also be used in order to determine and compare results of shaft between computer outcome and calculating results. Finally, bearings for corresponding shafts would also be selected based on their rotating speed and maximum load.
Unfortunately the computer program did not operate as expected so that the comparison between computer results and manual calculations could not be conducted. However, the variation of parameters in the computer program was limited so that only a limited number of comparisons could be done even though the programs were working properly. More developments and improvements were required in gear and shaft program so that a variety of variables could be selected for analysis.
Summary
Results  The gearbox design process was conducted successfully. The necessary calculations and investigations for surface and bending stresses as well as torsional analysis were performed various times and the results from computer program and manual method quite agreed with each other. This could be seen from the analysis of shaft, where there weren’t any major changes were observed regarding their diameters regarding both computer and manual outputs. The maximum shear force and bending moment were observed and calculated according to the maximum loading conditions. Moreover, the size of bearings was chosen near the final stage according to the diameter and length of the shaft which had been previously decided.
In conclusion, the design of the reduction gearbox for the commercial meat slicer was successful. Calculations were made for the appropriate gear and shaft sizes, the shaft was designed with bending moment and sheer force diagrams in order to ensure that it was of sufficient size. The optimal sizes of shafts and gears were found to be 12mm and 25mm for the shafts and 36mm and 161mm respectively for the gears. The appropriate size of bearings was also selected in order for the shafts to rotate at the specified speed and with maximum load. Finally, the optimal size of housing for the gearbox was determined to be 451.2mm x 335.3mm x 212.3mm.
The gearbox design was then constructed in SolidWorks, CAD drawing was then produced in order to minimize the required gearbox housing. A size of