The main problems with Eastern technological development were that either significant inventions were forgotten, or other advancements were not enhanced to their full potential. In the first instance, time measurement is an excellent example. Achievements such as Su Sung's forty-foot high clock, produced in 1086, had faded by the sixteenth century. Nothing like the European weight-driven clocks were developed, and in the seventeenth century the Jesuits were able to use the novelty of western timepieces as an attraction towards their appeal in the East. Also, in agriculture, many of the superior Asian techniques were forgotten even though they had been recorded. For instance, Wang Chen's work 'Treatise on Agriculture', published in 1331, had only one copy left by 1530. As Mokyr concludes 'a gradual deceleration took place that by the nineteenth century resulted in unmistakable backwardness compared to Europe' The second factor is more important in explaining divergence as many of East Asia's inventions were adapted by the west, which they developed further in order to enhance industrial progress. For example, although the Chinese invented printing, the process that they created was xylography- a wooden block with the text carved on it on reverse, which was then imprinted onto paper. Europeans adopted this technique throughout the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, however they progressed to using moveable letters when printing documents, which allowed for articles to be printed and subsequently circulated with higher frequency. Although Korea used metal moveable type from 1240 onwards, Asia as a whole failed to develop a similar system in parallel to the West. Another example of Eastern loss of technological superiority is warfare. The Chinese invented gunpowder, but it was used predominantly in rockets and bombs. Overall their weaponry consisted of more antiquated equipment such as bows and arrows. Europe, however, brought gunpowder back to the west and developed cannons. The East then had to learn how to use them from their European counterparts. Even then there were differences in reception throughout East Asia; Japan embraced western inventions, whereas throughout the sixteenth century Chinese officials had to repeatedly ask for the Chinese army to adopt the cannon before it was introduced.