It can be argued that the Romantic ideal of nature was reflected in Darwin's theory of evolution because both extended Man's relationship with nature. Darwin saw Man as part of the natural world, part of the same evolutionary chain that all species belonged too. The Romantics embraced the idea of nature as alive, something that starts and builds all life but also takes it away. They believed that man had a moral duty to nature and had to live in sympathy with it rather than conquering it. The concept of sympathy with nature is seen in Wordsworth's poem "The Tables Turned", in which nature and man are described as 'friend and brother'. This idea of 'friendship' between man and nature also appears in Romantic literature such as Frankenstein and was an idea that Darwin was to support. In his Origin of Species Darwin wrote 'from the war of nature, from famine and death, the most exalted object which we are capable of conceiving, namely, the production of higher animals, directly follows' He sees man as a product of nature, and speaks of nature with sympathy which reflects the Romantic view.  The Romantics also endeavoured to find a connection between Man and nature by looking inwards, by exploring the self. The Romantics conceived of the self as a metaphor for the natural world. They developed a symbol of this inner journey as the journey up a tree. Coleridge wrote of 'yew trees each with a palmy finger directing/High to the Heaven of its thought the invisible lightning' This metaphor of the tree with branches emanating upwards is also used by Keats in his poem "On a Tree Seen Growing out of a Wall". Keats writes of the tree 'struggling forth towards Heaven out of insuperable obstacles'. This image of the tree is a metaphor for the journey of self exploration and enlightenment. It shows the Romantic attempts to connect Man with nature. Darwin also explores this idea in Origin of Species. He speaks of the 'grand tree of life' Darwin was the first to reveal the true method by which species evolve and it is symbolised in his metaphor of the tree. It shows how the species are all related, implying the Romantic concept of the 'unity of life'. The metaphor of the tree is also symbolic of the 'oneness' of Man and nature. The tree is both a physical and a metaphorical connection between the two, and on one level Darwin's 'tree of life' is an alternative to the Romantic concept of the tree of self. The tree unites nature with the self and is a representation of the continuity between the two.