For middle class women, the omnipresent Victorian Domestic Ideology carried much weight with regard to their lifestyles and expected behaviour. Its restrictive nature left middle class women little freedom to choose their path in life or have any influence over their own decisions. Instead, they were expected to conform to social ideals of womanhood, in which they should be obedient, meek and, ultimately, subordinate to the male figures in their lives. This patriarchal system, both in the small scale of family life and the large scale of society as a whole, meant that women constantly had to conform to men's definitions and expectations, in which 'their [women's] sanity was often judged according to their compliance with middle-class standards of fashion'. Thus, while masculinity was synonymous with sanity and emotional health, femininity was synonymous with insanity and corrupt mentality. Being the moral guardians of the domestic sphere, this proved a problem as it threatened the morality of the home and future generations, thus male figures of authority were forced to control female madness to safeguard the population. Ironically, it was not the female half of the population that was protected and helped, instead they were further oppressed. Particularly frustrating for middle class women, puberty was a time when they were presented with the clear distinction between themselves and their brothers. Women came to see that their confinement to the home was the accepted woman's role, depriving them of intellectual and cultural stimulation and highlighting how 'puberty... gives to woman the conviction of her dependence'. With limited outlets for creativity and economic independence, marriage was the only viable option for the majority of middle class women. However, far from being a safe and protected haven it was observed that it was chiefly 'those women who are married, not in paid employment, with children living at home, who are most at risk of being positioned as mad'. This feeling of helplessness and isolation would have caused considerable distress to middle class women who aspired to achieve more, particularly those wealthy, literate and educated individuals who saw the possibility to engage in public life but were prevented from doing so on the basis of their sex.