Hitler's popularity amongst the majority of the German people have been variously analysed by historians, and though the percentages are debatable, it is generally recognized that his popularity was of fundamental importance to the functioning of the third Reich. As Ian Kershaw suggested 'The adulation of Hitler by millions of Germans who might otherwise have been only marginally committed to Nazism meant that the person of the F Despite the concession that Hitler, or rather the 'Hitler myth' played an important role in the third Reich, it does not follow that the influence was necessarily advantageous for Nazi Germany as a dictatorship. The nature of this question is quite deceptive, and the search for a direct answer can be elusive, due to the fact that the line between strength and weakness may be obscured. Hence, what may initially appear to have strengthened the Third Reich may in the long term prove to be the ultimate de-stabilising factor, threatening the very foundations that the Reich was built upon. To reach a conclusion regarding this question, it is imperative to examine the effects of Hitler's 'charismatic rule' on the following: the German people, the issue of legitimacy, the state bureaucracy, the party, and the resistance movement.
The obvious place to begin would be to examine the impact of 'charismatic rule' on its recipients, the German people. It is clear that Hitler's hold over the German mind was established mainly due to 'the promised recovery from national humiliation', and also, make no mistake, by the scarcity of opposition. As E.J.D.mirsheim remarks: ' Charisma can only appear when the general expectation of it is aroused in advance.' To all appearances, a classic case of the 'great man' gaining influence rapidly by taking advantage of favourable conditions, for 'great nations never pass at once from servitude to freedom.'. An opinion poll conducted in April 1936 revealed that 'about three-quarters of German citizens thought Hitler had done some good, and half of that number thought he had done a great deal of it.' This high level of adulation suggests that the German people were greatly satisfied with Hitler's rule, and this in turn boosted the image of the Nazi Party as the responsible government of Germany-a factor that was crucial to keep the people behind the Party and not to be disillusioned with it. It is evident that the identification of the people with the Fuhrer was such as to require no enforcer of loyalty, as stated by A.J.P.Taylor ' Hitler was not a dictator; he had no need to be. He was a prophet to whom the German nation had voluntarily submitted.' This evidently strengthens the standing of the Party as a dictatorship, but would this admiration persist, come what may?
The problem with the power residing in Hitler's 'charismatic rule' however, was that it required constant reinforcement from the regime. 'Hitler himself kept tight control over what soon became a cult of personality, carefully exploiting the image of him so to sustain the loyalty of the German people." Hence, in a regime as absolute as that in Nazi Germany, it is perhaps logical to observe that there was no one institution to which the power was vested, as would have been with a liberal democracy. Rather, the power stemmed from Hitler himself. Legitimacy was practically non-existent in terms of intangible elements such as the emergence of a strong state, and the possibilities of elections- all no through Hitler's 'charismatic rule', the cement that held the regime together was not supra-personal' The underlying imperatives of the regime were driven by a 'propensity towards destruction'; all in the seeming larger interests of the German people, which required more and more men to fight and die for Hitler's cause. This in effect, served to jeopardise the constitutional foundations of the Third Reich.
The Nazi state bureaucracy was more reliant on fear than on Hitler's 'charismatic rule'. The officials were in fact loyal to their own ambitions rather than the Fuhrer, and 'many state officials were neo-traditionalists, all of whom regarded Hitler as an instrument for the restoration of Germany's 'greatness' The loyalty to the Fuhrer did not extend to his orders, and these officials were also prone to attempt to bring about initiatives of their own against the will of the Fuhrer. This chaotic system of rule was perpetuated by the distrust between the Party and State, whereas the Party was Hitler's to command, the State tended to value autonomy.
Where did Hitler feature in this chaotic system of rule? It has been said that '...the symbolic Fuhrer authority was more important than the direct governing will of the person Hitler' For his part, Hitler encouraged Social Darwinism within the party and state, allowing competing interests to fight it out amongst themselves, through which, a victor emerges, or a consensus is reached, which would then have the backing of the Fuhrer. This laissez-faire attitude seemed to have compromised the standing of the Fuhrer on the affairs of the state, which is reinforced by records telling of Hitler's laid-back attitude to work. However, to conclude that Hitler was a weak dictator and that this in turn affected the standing of the Third Reich as a dictatorship would be unjustified. Though Hitler took a very long time to act, 'but when he did, his personal orders, or Despite the apparent success of this policy of Social Darwinism, it must be noted that this system 'led inexorably to an accelerating decline into aggression, lawlessness and criminal brutality' The system was essentially a very cracked pot, held together only by the 'glue', which was Hitler's authority.
It must also be said that the drive and motivation of the party to stay in power and be the most feared organisation must come from the top. The pivotal role of the Fuhrer towards the party can be seen in the close interaction between himself, Joseph Goebbels and the other important party member, such as Himmler and Bormann. ' This clearly reflects the right-hand man attitude of the party members, as if they were expecting the Fuhrer to make the final decisions, and that the various acts of violence were committed due to threats of the 'literal vengeance' of the Fuhrer himself. Thus, we see that Adolf Hitler was not so much content to remain in an undefined position of power as a symbol, but rather, he was actively involved in the pursuit of power through domineering the party. Furthermore, 'Hitler was a dictator with a strong attachment to ritual; his entourage had to demonstrate its loyalty and obedience through acts of servility, never losing sight of the Fuhrer's central role." However, due to the nature of his 'charismatic rule', the exact degree of power he wielded was open to interpretation. Hence, the power struggles with his underlings could never once and for all be settled, since the Fuhrer always has the power of veto, but 'this powerless power'-in-flux seemed to reinforce the chaotic atmosphere which was inherent in the Third Reich.
The final factor to consider in this question are the effects of Hitler's 'charismatic rule' on the resistance movement. With the Fuhrer so popular and the extent of his backing so seemingly unscalable, one would be forgiven for denying the existence of any notable resistance during Hitler's reign. However, resistance from individualists and Marxists, both from within and outside Germany existed, though in small doses, and were largely ineffective. This resistance can be explained to stem in part from the totalitarian state, as well as the authority of the Fuhrer. According to one historian, the 'Hitler Myth' deteriorated as Germany suffered successive military defeats, and a fall in Hitler's expansive promises. There was amongst some sections of society, a realisation that the Nazi dictatorship would eventually lead to disaster, and only more suffering and economic hardship. This disillusionment also paralysed certain elements, who were then inclined to 'Keep themselves out of anything that might land them in trouble with the Nazis.'
In conclusion, it has been suggested that there were both topical and structural flaws with the concept of 'charismatic rule. Legitimacy of the Third Reich was obtained not from established institutions, but rather, from a man, and his myth. The power of the Fuhrer was however conditional on success-unless rewards were reaped from his leadership, the mandate could be taken as passing away from the Fuhrer. The close association of the Fuhrer-myth with the state meant that unlike Stalin, Hitler was unable to escape the failure and blame for the decline of the state, and the result of this inability to pass responsibility was a 'serious meltdown' in the popularity of the Fuhrer. The resulting crisis issued the 'final combat order', which sealed the fate of the Reich. The chaotic state bureaucracy, the collapse of authority when Hitler dies, and the pre-occupation of Hitler with his own destiny all contributed to the weakening of the Nazi dictatorship. Thus, it can be contended that Hitler's 'charismatic rule' was an embattled concept of legitimacy, reflecting both the strength and the weakness of the Third Reich.
Hitler's 'charismatic rule' worked to the benefit of the regime initially, when the conditions were favourable, and the success that was much desired was obtained. Entry into World War II was inevitable for the survival of the system that inherently thrived on dynamism and periods of emergency, but it was a double-edged sword, in that failure of the war effort would surely bring the Nazi dictatorship to its knees, and it did. As the war started going badly, 'the tide of Hitler's popularity first waned rather slowly, then ebbed sharply-a decline accelerating after Stalingrad, when Hitler's personal responsibility for the catastrophe was widely recognised." Even the tool of propaganda could not erase the fallibility of the Fuhrer in the eyes of the people, instead, it made the population even more distrustful of the system that they had come to doubt. Therefore, the writer would conclude that ultimately, Hitler's 'charismatic rule' weakened the Third Reich as a dictatorship, due to the innately destructive elements in this concept of legitimacy.