Social unrests were not unique to the 19 Despite the consolidation of power during the reign of the Emperor Kangsi to Qianlong, there remained however, certain underlying grievances that were never fully eradicated, which led to the persistence of the themes such as 'Over-throw the Qing, Restore the Ming', ethnic and religious tensions. The end of the Qianlong era marked the conclusion of the golden age of Qing rule and saw the gradual decline of central power vis- Though westerners have had a presence in China dating back to the Yuan dynasty, the Opium Wars and the corresponding treaty system marked a watershed for China-West relations, resulting in the change of status quo, of perceptions; and manifested itself in the increasingly intrusive presence of the West, which exposed the many weaknesses of the Qing state, making it more vulnerable to attacks from within. It is in this context that the above question should be addressed, and the writer will examine firstly the internal conditions and entrenched corruption which made it conducive for the outbreak of social unrests, followed by the implications of change brought about by the West, such as the desire to trade, introduction of new technology, ideas, religion, and the pursuit of Imperialism which clashed with Chinese assumptions of the monopoly of civilization, and in turn produced a virulent anti-foreign nationalism which threatened the social order during the period in question. Hence the writer will argue that the social unrests at the beginning of the 19
The growth in population, and a corresponding increase in pressure on available land resources, was an important contributing factor to the social unrests. The population of China had tremendously increased in the end of the Eighteenth and the beginning of the Nineteenth century from 150 million to 400 million, yet the Yuan-Ming-Yuan could not reform the land distribution system, nor expand grain production via the building of canals, nor provide protection against natural calamities, all of which contributed to further deepening of poverty and exacerbation of social unrest across the nation. In particular, the revolt of the secret societies such as the White Lotus Society and the Triads in different parts of China between 1794-1850, saw the conversion of hundreds of thousands of members, and was fuelled by anti-dynastic sentiment, as well as hatred against the privileged class. Specifically, the most notorious group was the Taipings, who formed in 1845 by Hung Jen-Kan, and claimed to fulfil the will of God. One of its famous declaration was: 'The dynasty of Manchu evil doers is destroyed fall', and 'the mandate of Heaven is shifted to our movement', and quite obviously, the source of such royal challenge could not have originated from within a secure and well-ordered society.
The Taiping Rebellion (1850-64), the Nian Rebellion (1851-68) and the Muslim Rebellions (1855-73), and the White Lotus Rebellion (1795-1840) though different in many aspect, had a common thread, in that these rebellions also shared with the Provincial Uprisings of the late 19 Much of these uprisings were caused by the coercion and control by the state, excessive taxation, and increased military campaigns which impaired the right of the people, hence rendering them vulnerable to the appeals and promises of the leaders of the movements. The burdens which the common people had to bear was aggravated by the fact that famine was part of the social landscape of the period, 'China had been in the grip of a three decade famine starting from 1810, which crippled the economic welfare of millions of people in North China..." Famines were often caused by drought or combination of drought with floods, and these were the root causes of the Taiping,Nian and Muslim rebellions and various Provincial Uprisings. The people during the Qing period had no remedies for these natural disasters; so it was not easy for the population to bear the additional strain of increased taxation imposed by the government. The increase in tax levies, corvee (slavery worked for the state) could explain the Nian rebellion, which was largely sparked off by the imposition of such levies. In Hebei for example, the establishment of new magistrate's offices, 'meaning an increase of official servants and public burdens- generated a wave of riots and uprisings in the vicinities of Beijing'. China's downfall to opium has been magnified to an unreasonable extent by some historians, but the excessive burden of both opium and salt taxation, which negatively affect the majority of the population, could be seen as contributing factors that fermented rebellion.
The inability of the State to alleviate the situation plaguing the population, and the ineffectiveness of the Army in putting down the rebellions are perhaps telling of the decay within the Qing central administration, which permeated to the lower level officials. The appalling inertia of the State led Zeng Guofan to condemn the ruinous tendency of officials 'to gloss over, to make up and to steal days of ease." The two chief ministers under Daoguang's reign, Tsao Chen Yung and Mu-chang-a discouraged officials from talking about national policy, and those who dared petition to the throne were threatened with punishments. It is perhaps not surprising then, to find the character of Chen Tsu-ch'en, the governor of Guangxi who did not bother with administrative affairs, bit prayed instead to Buddha to dispel catastrophes. 'Such was the immediate political background-general lethargy and irresponsibility-which paved the way for Taiping's rapid development." The corruption and lack of discipline within the Army was so rampant, that by the time of the White Lotus Rebellion, local militias had to be organized to compensate for the ineffectual standing army. Similarly, it was Zeng's Hunan army, Li Hongzhang's Huai army and Zuo Zhongtang's army, that suppressed the Taiping, the Nian and the Muslim rebellions. Also, inner court intrigues dominated the post Xian-feng era, which saw the rise of the Empress Dowager Cixi and her cronies, and in turn compromised the power of the Emperor to act as the unifying force of China. The diversion of resources meant for military and emergency purposes to fund the decadence of the court left China in a weakened state, creating ample opportunities for the outbreak of rebellions.
The writer will now turn to the implications of the role of the West in creating social unrests in the early 19 The presence of the West in China can be traced back to the time of the Yuan dynasty, but it was the Opium War and the subsequent treaty system that marked a watershed for China-West relations. The British sought to export manufactured goods, but there was a persistent imbalance in the trade The chief aim of the Opium Trade was to equalize the balance of trade between the two countries, by having the Chinese to buy opium with the silver that was that was brought in by the British merchants. The Qing had initially sought to repress the opium trade, but as the British exerted pressure on China with their military superiority combined with the problems of the domestic politics This treaty also granted the British the right to converse residually and enabled the British to avoid the arduous task of obtaining Imperial sanction for their mission, which further enraged the officials and gentry class, and it contributed to the eruption of the Ti-ping Rebellion.
The conflict between Chinese and Foreigners was largely one between opposing cultural and religious values, which was further exacerbated by the proselytizing foreign missionaries intent on making converts. Most Chinese regarded the spread of Christianity as a major threat to their society, for the Christians 'insisted that only one tradition and only one religion were to be tolerated.'
Chinese defeat to the Allied British and French forces in 1960 led to the conclusion of a treaty, which granted full official toleration to the missionary, and also opened up the hinterland to the spread of Christianity. 'One result of this new set of circumstances was a considerable broadening and intensification of the tradition of Chinese hostility toward Christianity." Though the Christian attack on ancestor worship and idolatry offended all Chinese, it is interesting to note that anti-Christian demonstrations were often provoked by the exhortations of the gentry and official class; who saw themselves as defenders of Confucian order and civilisation in a period of disorder, and whom regarded Christianity as the anti-thesis of Confucianism, and as the imperialistic tool of the foreigners. The presence of missionaries who abused their positions by interfering in lawsuits, and in shielding their converts from Chinese law, as well as the flaunting of treaty rights in demanding large amount of indemnity as payment for damages did not endear them to the local populace. The problem was particularly acute with regards to the French Catholic missionaries, and 'the Tientsin Massacre (1870) represented the culmination of a decade of Sino-foreign friction revolving around Christian missionary activities.'
Though undoubtedly, the presence of the West were primarily responsible for causing the social unrests, and the large expansion in trade, immigration, and the influx of western ideas and religion unsettling to the existing order, the Western presence cannot be said to be wholly responsible for the outbreak of the rebellions, though its role should not be underestimated.
The West, particularly the Germans, played a significant role in the growth of Chinese militarism in the late 19 This period marked the beginning of the 'New Military Schooling.' and in its quest for military supremacy, which ' represented another indication of the increasingly intense Chinese competition between the imperial ambitions of the Qing and the expanding Chinese assimilation of western weapons and military technology." This movement was mainly aimed at defending China against Western imperialism, and for the purpose, they sent army officers to study military science and artillery in Germany. Thus the military reform gave rise to a new anti-Western group: the Boxers who ' characteristically combined nationalism with millenarianism.' Their ideology was not too dissimilar to the Chinese Christian movement, in terms of their appeal for common people to overthrow the Manchus and restore the Ming by magical powers. The Boxers possessed significant military capability which saw them advance to the gates of Beijing, and brought Tientsin under siege.
However, the West were particularly influential in helping the Qing to put down the social unrests, such as the employment of the Ever-Victorious Army and Gordon's artillery in supplementing the regular forces and local militias in putting down the Taiping. It must be said that generally, the West were adverse to social unrests, especially in the treaty ports where trade was concentrated, because social instability often interfered with trade and economic prosperity. The open intervention pursued by the West in suppressing the Taiping was to their interests: for the defense of Shanghai, and as a useful bargaining chip with the Qing government when seeking concessions. Also, in the Muslim rebellion in the Kansu, England secretly supported Yakub Beg, the leader of the rebellion, while Russia opposed the expansion of Yakub Beg's power, and under the pretense of maintaining peace along the border, occupied Ili in 1871, subdued the Mohammedan chief and moved troops into Urumchi.
Perhaps the most glaring exclusion in this essay is the role of Japan in the social unrests of the 19 The Sino-Japanese War of 1894-5 shook the Chinese self-confidence, and marked an end to the era of 'Self-Strengthening'. Though there was no particular anti-Japanese event, anti-Japanese sentiments took root during this era, and set the stage for more explicit and violent anti-Japanese movements that continue to present time.
In conclusion, the social unrests of the early 19 However, The Opium War and the Treaty System that was imposed marked a watershed in the Qing-West relations, allowing the West to expose the weaknesses of the Qing State, making it more vulnerable to rebellions, and the rise of Western Imperialism in the quest for territorial gains and in the spread of Christianity, which led to the creation of anti-foreign nationalism, which dominated the face of social unrests in the late 19 Also, where their interests were concerned, the West would intervene to suppress social unrests in order to safeguard their commercial interests. Hence the parallel streams of development: the decline of the central power of the Qing State, and the growing western presence and penetration gave the West increasing importance in the creation and suppression of social unrests of the 19