Having looked at many different factors which may cause unpopularity and the differences between rejected and neglected there is now the issue of psychological development to cover. It is important to consider here the implications of being sufficiently unpopular to also be considered "rejected" as this appears to have the more extreme implications for psychological development. It has been suggested that popular children tend to receive more positive reinforcement, which has implications for self esteem and psychological development (Kupersmidt et al, 1990). If this is not received then a child may struggle to keep up positive interpersonal relationships and friendships and therefore experiences increased loneliness, social isolation and guilt, which all have obvious implications for psychological development (Kupersmidt et al, 1990). Besides these possible issues it has also been suggested that unpopular children may not receive positive reinforcement stating that their's is insufficient or incorrect behaviour. This obviously has implications and could lead to behaviour which further alienates them from social groups and increases their unpopularity (Kupersmidt et al, 1990). It is important to consider that this can lead to self fulfilling prophecy as previously stated. If a child believes they are not behaving correctly then they may continue to not behave correctly as they are convinced that the behaviour is wrong. The differences between rejected and neglected appear to be important when looking at psychological development. Not only due to the difference in being actively disliked and not, but also because of the type of problems that are associated with rejection and neglect. Being rejected leads to external problems such as aggression, hostile arguments and violence (Asher, 1990). It has been found that the absence of friends results in the child compensating by seeking approval through external sources, which can increase the problem with external aggression and hostility (Kupersmidt et al, 1990). This is obviously of importance in terms of psychological development as it can lead to criminal behaviour, although again it is emotion to decide whether the criminal behaviour was a cause of rejection or a symptom of rejection. If it is a cause then there are other elements to look into such as social learning theory etc.