The neglected type of unpopular child presents a different outlook. These children appear to struggle to build relationships with their peers and tend to lack the confidence and communication skills to do so (Asher, 1990). There has been some research that links these children to learning and medical disabilities (Asher, 1990). These children tend to be more vocal in their studies (Grusec1992) and have been observed to have learning difficulties in both children and adults (Anderson and Adams 1991) (as cited in Asher, 1990). This knowledge would suggest that these children may require more external aid in learning than those who were popular and this consequently may be why unpopular children have been found to have lower self esteem (Kupersmidt et al, 1990). This in itself though does not causes psychological problems but does cause isolation and the fear of isolation which can have implications on a child's mental health.  The neglected type of unpopular child also appears to be more likely to have psychological disorders such as anxiety disorders, mood disorders and later in life substance abuse (Kupersmidt et al, 1990). These children appear to suffer from more psychological difficulties due to the fact that they do not have the support system of a friend or family to whom they can talk or to offer reassurance when needed. They tend to be lonely (Grusec, 1992) and have difficulty talking to peers. It has been suggested that these children suffer from a lack of supportive positive experiences (Grusec, 1992). This again may be related to lack of reciprocal friendships and social learning opportunities. It would appear that these psychological difficulties are caused by a lack of opportunity to learn prosocial skills and rejective behaviour meaning these children have difficulty in establishing relationships and sustaining them and become isolated but not necessarily for any other reason other than the fact that they are disabled in social interaction. Consequently because of this they become lonely and are more likely to developed psychological difficulties.