Society sometimes perceives overweight people as lazy, blaming them for not having enough willpower to stick to a healthy regime. However, weight control can be an uphill struggle, not only to lose weight, but then also to maintain it. It is proposed that our genes may give us a predisposition to store fat reserves, as evolution has led us to have a natural drive to eat as much as possible when food is available. However, in today's society, where food is so plentiful, it is easy to over consume. There are many biological factors that contribute to weight regulation; homeostasis, certain brain structures, neurochemicals and metabolism have all been found to influence our weight. However, despite our genetic predispositions, it may be possible to overcome these biological factors through willpower.
Weight control has grown to become an issue of great importance in modern society, however the strategy or combination of strategies that would result in successful long-term weight control remains unknown. This has led to the common belief that it is simply a matter of willpower and there has been considerable debate as to whether it is the biological processes such as homeostasis that can override non-homeostatic influences like external stimuli and whether willpower alone can overcome these drives. Thus, this essay examines the extent to which weight regulation is a matter of willpower or of systemic and hormonal processes.
The amount of body fat carried is regulated by homeostasis, which ensures that the internal state is kept within a critical range to avoid disruption and death of cells (F.Schlaghecken, lecture, 5th March, 2004). Weight regulation is controlled by a negative feedback loop, which produces behaviour oscillating around the ideal 'set point'. We therefore eat to obtain nutrients when we are hungry, and stop when we are satiated. However, we often eat before we feel hungry and stop before we feel full. Thus, there must be other factors that influence our decisions to begin and end consumption. In the short-term, it seems that there is no single signal that is used exclusively (Rosenzweig, Breedlove & Leiman, 2002) though plasma glucose concentration, body temperature, plasma amino acids, cholecystokinin (CCK) and other hormones can all control meal patterns by feelings hunger and satiety (Friedman & Halaas, 1998).
The balance between energy intake and expenditure is essential for maintaining body weight. Adrenergic hormones such as noradrenaline and adrenaline are released from the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) in response to changes in body weight. If body weight is lost, this signals the SNS to reduce metabolic rate in order to create an energy positive balance in the body from which body weight can recover. Thus increases in SNS activity can induce a state of negative energy balance, resulting in weight loss. On the other hand, if body weight deviates above the configurable range and body fat is gained, this provides the hypothalamus with bidirectional signals from both the SNS and site of fat storage to reduce energy intake, and to increase energy expenditure by increasing the metabolic rate through stimulation of the SNS.  Appetite and eating behaviour is also regulated by certain receptors in the hypothalamus. These neurons have receptors that can detect leptin, a hormone that is secreted by fat cells. The level of leptin can be taken as an indicator of the amount of adipose tissue present in the body and it is thought to be the key to the body's overall energy balance. When the body's fat stores decrease the levels of leptin in the blood become reduced leading to an increase in appetite and a decrease in metabolism. When the fat stores are replenished the levels of leptin are restored to normal and the appetite and metabolism are suppressed (Rosenzweig, Breedlove & Leiman, 2002).
In the hypothalamus, leptin binds to specific receptors in the arcuate nucleus, which causes a series of events to occur. By binding with the nucleus' receptors, leptin inhibits the production and secretion of agouti-related peptide (AGRP) and neuropeptide Y (NPY). The arcuate nucleus is then stimulated to send excitatory signals to the paraventricular nucleus, causing the NPY to increase the appetite, decrease metabolism and stimulate the formation of adipose tissue. The binding of leptin also induces the release of melanocyte stimluating hormone (-MSH) that inhibits eating. As the leptin levels decrease, hunger is induced and weight may be gained (Rosenzweig, et al., 2002). However, once stimulated, the paraventricular nuclei also release corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) to the posterior pituitary. The release of CRH induces a release of adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), which in turn increases the metabolic rate, and the speed of the breakdown of fat stores. ACTH stimulated the adrenal cortex to release glucocorticoids and stimulates the sympathetic nervous system. This results in suppressing hunger and an increased metabolic rate (Friedman & Halaas, 1998; Rosenzweig, et al., 2002; Schwartz & Gelling, 2002).
This explains how leptin controls weight by causing feelings of hunger and satiety. During starvation, leptin levels decrease, eliciting a behavioural, neurochemical and metabolic response. Weight gain increases leptin levels and induces a different response, leading to a state of negative energy balance. During dieting leptin levels fall, which may account for the low success rate of dieting, as low leptin is likely to stimulate weight gain (Friedman & Halaas, 1998).
If the control of body weight were exclusively attributable to biological processes then we would naturally eat a completely balanced diet and have no real preferences for foods. It appears that the hypothalamus is important in the regulation of body weight. However, it is not only associated with lower level processes in the body, it also incorporates higher-level processes such as possible cognitive influences from higher brain areas, suggesting that there may be non-homeostatic influences over eating control. There is considerable evidence that a person does not purely feel hungry as a result of the body's homeostatic function. External factors such as learned behaviour can be extremely powerful over seemingly biological drives.
Investigations into learned eating behaviour in rats appear to display this influence. After a few days of feeding at a certain time each day, the rats displayed behaviour of expecting food, even when they had just been fed (F. Schlaghecken, lecture, 5 This suggests that after a relatively short period of time behaviour concerning eating can be learned and apparently override the internal drives of satiety. This evidence would strongly imply that a person has considerable control over their weight and the ability to lose weight; if behaviour regarding eating can be learned in a matter of days, forming new eating habits or reversing old habits ought to be possible.
Willpower is generally considered to be self-discipline, determining the motivation and ability to perform a task. Even if willpower does allow us to override behaviour, there may be other biological factors, such as cravings that reduce willpower and make weight loss difficult.
Motivation can influence what a person consumes, however overcoming cravings can be a fundamental problem for people trying to lose weight and is commonly where willpower fails. A substantial number of obese individuals have indicated that their inability to lose weight resulted from excessive snacking due to cravings for sweets (Schlundt, Virts, Sbrocco, Pope-Cordle & Hill, 1993). A direct link between overeating and decreased serotonin levels, (Wurtman & Wurtman, 1981) has suggested that these cravings could be due to a drop in serotonin levels in the brain.
Serotonin is a neurotransmitter that regulates several vital mood processes in the body, including eating patterns. High levels of serotonin are associated with satiety, whereas reduced levels have been found to cause depression and also feelings of hunger. Therefore the body does its best to maintain a high level of serotonin. Serotonin is produced in the body via 5-Hydroxy Tryptophan (5-HTP). Its precursor, the amino acid tryptophan, can only be provided via the food we consume. As a result these foods tend to be craved by the body in order to elevate serotonin levels, and in turn improve mood. However, in order to have a significant effect on serotonin levels, the intake of these tryptophan-containing foods needs to be sufficiently high. Unfortunately, these foods tend to have a high carbohydrate and fat content. Evidence for this comes from the fact that obese individuals show low levels of serotonin and crave high carbohydrate foods to make themselves feel better (Wurtman & Wurtman, 1981).
Thus, if excessive carbohydrate and fat intake leads to obesity, then it could be argued that cravings for these foods are due to the body's natural attempts to maintain a serotonin balance. This would go on to explain why cravings are so strong and why they can only be supressed temporarily with willpower.
To gain weight, it is necessary to increase metabolism, as by increasing metabolic rate we can increase the amount of energy we can expend. Metabolic rate is the speed at which food is broken down by the body and the body operates to maintain its set point. Metabolic rate can be divided into two main areas, the basal metabolic rate (BMR), and the resting metabolic rate (RMR). Although BMR influences the rate at which food is broken down, it is genetically predetermined and so cannot be wilfully altered depending upon the time of day. However, RMR can be influenced through eating behaviour (Melby, Scholl, Edwards & Bullough, 1993).
Exercise is believed to help increase metabolic rate. Melby, Scholl, Edwards & Bullough (1993) found post exercise metabolic rate (PEMR) to be higher than RMR following ninety minutes of strenuous resistive exercise, and remained higher than the RMR until the following morning, fifteen hours after exercising. This shows that strenuous resistive exercise can raise PEMR for a relatively long period of time. So the ideal time to eat is after exercise, when the metabolic rate is highest, resulting in a faster breakdown of food, with the maximum possible calorie expenditure. Thus by choosing an appropriate time to eat and by exercising, a person can increase their metabolic rate. A person can also control what they eat; it has been found that eating fat is linked to weight gain, whereas choosing carbohydrates and proteins not only satisfies appetite better, but also increases the metabolism (Lean, 2003). Fluids as well as food can increase metabolic rate; drinking 500ml of water can increase metabolic rate by 30% (Boschmann, Steiniger, Hille, Tank, Adams, Sharma, Klaus, Luft & Jordan, 2003). So although metabolic rate is a biological mechanism, which is genetically determined, the person can wilfully influence it, by altering their lifestyle and enable weight loss to take place.
The social aspect of eating behaviour which influences hunger and satiety levels is largely learned and therefore could theoretically be altered. In the same way, it seems that willpower could potentially suppress cravings and over-ride intrinsic metabolic rates. However, whilst the discussed biological factors do play an important role in weight regulation, the underlying mechanisms such as homeostasis give us an evolutionary predisposition to prevent weight loss, making it difficult to lose weight. Considering all these factors, though willpower contributes to weight loss, wilful changes on behaviour seem to have a relatively small impact and are difficult to sustain. It appears that eating behaviour is largely biologically driven and the notion that weight loss is exclusively a matter of willpower is too na