The number of people affected by dementia does not end with the patients. Current research is increasingly showing that these numbers are severe underestimates, as dementia affects almost all people a patient interacts with (Gilliard, 2001). In fact, the sheer amount of literature on caregiver well-being aptly demonstrates the profound psychological effects on the caregiver as well. The psychological effects on both patients and caregivers appear to be causal and heavily overlap, that is to say, the psychological effects on the patient tend also to have corresponding psychological effects on the caregiver and vice versa. Therefore, I propose that in order to extend our understanding of dementia, we should work towards a more integrated focus, exploring the links between the effects on the patient and the carer. This essay will discuss the psychological effects of dementia on the patient and the caregiver and the impact of these effects on one another, using Alzheimer's disease (AD) as my primary example.
Alzheimer's disease is a form of degenerative dementia, first described by Alois Alzheimer in 1907. Roughly 5.3 million people in America alone suffer from AD which is expected to triple over the next 50 years (Schneider et al., 2001). According to the World Health Organisation (2001), AD is the most common cause of dementia, accounting for over 50% of all cases, hence it is particularly important to understand the psychological effects of dementia in order to help sustain and improve the quality of life of not only the patient but also of the primary carer.
For many years dementia was regarded as part of the normal ageing process but now, due to improved diagnostic techniques, it is believed that it is actually a syndrome caused by a variety of age-related conditions and mental illnesses, the most common contributing factor being Alzheimer's disease, due to its prevalence and co-occurrence with other distinguishing disorders (Seltzer, Vasterling &Butwell 1995, as cited in Seligman et al., 2001).
The psychological effects on the patient range from minor to major and due to the causes of dementia, often times patients are unaware of the deterioration. Consequently, dementia for the most part is associated with one type, Alzheimer's disease (AD); a degenerative neurological disease characterized by progressive neuronal losses, particularly within the hippocampus (Morris et al, 1988).
Memory impairments are the most frequently reported symptoms of dementia (Maciejewski, 2001). As a result of their memory deficits, patients are unable to recall previously encountered objects and events and hence have difficulty in remembering to do tasks (McKeith et al, 1995). Memory impairment was found to be present in almost one half of all patients with mild AD (Read et al, 1998). One of the first results of memory impairment is an inability to remember new information, also known as anterograde memory (Korsakoff, 1889, as cited in Stokes & Holden, 1990). Maciejewski (2001) found that AD patients have particular difficulty in remembering to complete items on a list although they have retained some memory of the instructions, that is to say, AD does not erase already learned information but rather causes difficulty in transferring that information a few minutes later. This finding is in line with Grober and Sliwinski's (1991, as cited in Maciejewski, 2001) empirical work showing that AD patients are able to recall items on a list one or two items up or down the list, but are unable to recall items further along the list. However, their memory is not necessarily destroyed, as they are able to re-learn the items again, hinting at what is known as 'hard - head' forgetting.
It has been proposed that this pattern of memory deficits are a result of decreased efficiency of the medial temporal structures due to their structural deterioration (Alexopoulos, 2003). Their inefficient metabolism leads to a disruption of the thalamo-cortical loop; the resulting neural damage impedes the encoding of new memories, as well as its recall from the hippocampus (Alexopoulos, 2003). In cases of AD, this appears to be one of the main difficulties, thus it is common practise to assess one's memory when diagnosing dementia and when assessing disease progress (Morris, 1999).
The world of an AD patient is arguably far more unstable than that of a normal elderly person, this instability is partly due to the changes in attention. These deficits can range from distractibility to an inability to maintain attention. Perry and Hodges (1999) estimate that up to two-thirds of patients with Alzheimer's show evidence of an attentional deficit, hence it is likely to be linked to AD. Cano and Heaton (1993, as cited in Maciejewski, 2001) considered attentional deficits to be very important in the early detection of AD as it has been found that in comparison to other dementias, AD patients showed a far greater impairment on attentional tasks.
Image problems are also common in dementia, whereby the patient has difficulty in accurately judging the size, shape and shape of an object (Levin, 1982, as cited in Morris, 1999). It has been argued that visual imagery deficits in dementia are largely caused by retrieval problems in the semantic memory (Garrard et al., 1999). Research on AD patients has found that they demonstrate difficulties in visual imagery tasks that do not depend on semantic memory (Hodges and Patterson, 1995) suggesting that there is a problem with memory formation, rather than memory retrieval and consistent with the lesion profile of AD (Morris, 2001). Furthermore, visual imagery has important implications in everyday life, not only in terms of the difficulty the patient may have in navigating and performing tasks (Morris, 1999) but also in affecting social interaction as imagined facial expressions can be mistaken for genuine expressions (McDonald et al, 1990 as cited in Levin, 1993).
Visuospatial deficits are common in AD (Perry and Hodges, 1999) and can manifest themselves in many seemingly harmless ways to the patient. Prosopagnosia (face blindness) is commonplace in AD and is associated with reduced cerebral metabolism in the right and left ventral occipito-temporal regions (Rosen et al, 1994, as cited in Hodges and Patterson, 1995). As well as being socially awkward, face recognition is also essential in remembering who you are, hence prosopagnosia may lead to an inability to identify oneself and can also result in paranoia due to an inability to differentiate people. The difficulties experienced by the patient have obvious implications for the caregiver, as they become responsible for the safety and well being of the patient. This often places the caregiver under immense strain as the patient's needs have to be catered for, which requires a great deal of understanding of the severity of the psychological effects on the patient, as well as the practical skills needed to care for them (Gilliard, 2001).
The psychological effects of dementia on the patient have a profound impact on the caregiver. The caregiver should only be considered a 'carer' when not only are they providing care for the patient but also when it results in an emotional strain (Bristot, 1986). This is clearly manifest in the number of psychological effects endured by the caregiver, due to the changes exhibited in the patient.
Although psychological effects of dementia on caregivers in terms of stress, illness, anxiety and depression have known for sometime now (e.g Maciejewski, 2001), research into this area has been in consistency undertaken over the past two decades (e.g Stoller, 1988). The most commonly reported effects on caregivers are physical and psychological health problems, sleep deprivation (Gilliard, 2001) and isolation (Gill & Doke, 1994). Moreover, the strain on the caregiver themselves can begin to heavily eat up into other areas of their life causing impairment in their social, occupational, educational and recreational activities. Having discussed the psychological effects on the patient, I now address the impact these have on the caregiver. As previously mentioned, the psychological effects on both the patient and the caregiver are frequently mirrored, hence any deterioration of the patient's mental well-being could probably be expected to cause an increase in stress on the caregiver's mental well-being also.
Due to the immense pressure the caregiver is under, elder abuse is not uncommon; in fact physical abuse by trusted caregivers is among the most common type of violent offense experienced by older adults (Payne, 2002). Poor premorbid relationships in particular, have been found to be a key factor in predicting abuse and challenging behaviors are also heavily correlated with abuse (Compton et al, 1997). The psychological strain placed upon the carer could not only lead to violence but also to neglect (Pritchard, 1995). However, neglect may purely be down to an unawareness of appropriate ways to provide care (Johnson, 1995, as cited in Payne, 2002), hence highlighting the need for training for caregivers. For example, anger is very common in caregivers, hence it is imperative to identify and treat these negative thoughts in order prevent harm to the patient. Devries and Gallagher-Thompson (1993, as cited in Maciejewski, 2001) proposed a group treatment using a cognitive approach that challenges and replaces the negative thoughts with more adaptive cognitions accompanied by relaxation and assertion training strategies.
From the evidence presented above, it appears that many of the cognitive effects of dementia have profound psychological effects on the patient, which in turn can directly or indirectly affect the caregiver. Two of the most common features of dementia include disorientation and disturbances in behaviour (Morris et al, 1988), both of which have significant implications for the lives of the patient and the caregiver. Disorientation and confusion, induce uncertainty in the patient's ability to make sense of the world around them, resulting in fear, paranoia and agitated behaviour. An inability to reorient and correctly interpret the environment implies a lack of judgement, thus endangering the patient, for example instability and the risk of falling. This confusion and disorientation is extremely distressing and frustrating, both for the patient and the caregiver. It could also lead to behavioural changes in the patient such as irritability, aggression and restlessness (Morris et al, 1988). These behaviours could be the cause of the increased levels in violence, suicide and other health relatd problems reported in caregiver's of dementia patients (Morrissey et al, 1990). Medication is often the most effective form of treatment for these behaviours but such treatments can often have an apathetic effect (Stokes and Holden, 1990), which may also be psychologically detrimental to the patient.
The actual relationship between the caregiver and the patient can also impose psychological effects on both parties. Tension often arises when there is a discrepancy between what the patient feels they need and what the caregiver wants (e.g. if they need a break). The nature of this can have a big effect on the caregiver's ability to cope, for example a close and intimate relationship can induce feelings of depression in the caregiver as well as an inability to communicate (Morris et al, 1988). This is further supported by the fact that if the relationship is close then the strain placed upon the caregiver is greater (Goudie, 1990)
It is important to bear on mind that what has been presented here is by no means a definitive list of the psychological effects present and is essentially a discussion of some of the most common aspects of dementia. In reviewing the literature, it appears that in the same way that the patient's illness develops and worsens with time, the same is paralleled in the caregiver's experience of the disease. In fact, there is often evidence for the characteristics of the patient being mirrored by the caregiver (Gilliard, 2001). Despite the alternative causes for the effects on caregivers offered in this essay (e.g. social role and gender), research has found that there are no significant differences in coping strategies between caregivers of dementia patients and of other illnesses (LeVesque, Ducharme and Lachance, 1999). Therefore it must be the nature of dementia, more specifically, its effects on the patient, that causes the increase in stress experienced by caregivers. However, there is very little current research on how these psychological effects on the patient directly effect the caregiver's well being. This is particularly important as not only do the effects on the patient have profound effects on the caregiver but as we have seen, these negative effects can also promote the caregiver to harm the patient, hence creating a vicious cycle. Therefore, we need further research to focus on how the psychological effects of dementia on the patient affect the caregiver's mental health, resulting in an integrative approach that would help improve the welfare of both the patient and the caregiver.