Flashbulb memories are autobiographical memories, which are typically vivid and detailed, for instance, where or with whom the person was when they heard the news, and how they felt afterwards (Brown & Kulik, 1977). Researchers have suggested that an initial emotional reaction to news of an unexpected and especially dramatic event profoundly affects the amount and type of information acquired (Thompson, 1988, summarized in Eich et al, 2000). Brown and Kulik (1977, as cited in Eich et al, 2000) proposed a number of processes that might occur, one of which is selective attention. In this way, visual or auditory information that is directly or tangentially affected by the event is filtered out from the environment by attention selectively being oriented to the flashbulb event, thus acquiring information that is stored in memory. Subsequently, subjects may repeat the details of the event to themselves, thus strengthening the memory, or recall one element of the event that seems more salient to them than others, thus forming an 'edge' to the memory. Subsequently, people ask themselves, over time, 'What was I doing when I heard that..?' then continuing to recall more context to the event, thus enriching their memory for the event. Brown and Kulik (1977, as cited in Eich et al, 2000) reported that the most long lasting, detailed and precise flashbulb memories occurred in response to highly emotional, personally relevant events, as in the case of President Kennedy's assassination, and they suggested that the strength of retrospectively reported emotions of surprise and shock produced by the event acts as an 'emotional tag' that closes off this kind of memory three days after the event. Part of the evidence for the processes postulated by Brown and Kulik is that their detail levels of their flashbulb accounts have been shown, with evidence of greater accuracy for facts directly associated with the event than facts related to the context in which these facts were experienced (Hirst, Luddeke & Frison, 1988, as cited in Eich et al , 2000). Further evidence in support of the idea of a flashbulb memory is a replication of the same experiment, involving two groups of citizens from two different cities, one close to and the other distant from the Challenger explosion, by Conway et al (1990, as cited in Eich et al, 2000). It was observed that memory accuracy was highest in those close to the disaster, although the selective attention hypothesis proposes that the effects should be equal for both affected and unaffected, since attention should be affected mainly by the event itself, rather than the physical location of the respondent (Eich et al, 2000). One potential explanation of this differential is that subjects who experienced the event from afar were also more affected by media input about the event, and were thus more reactive than those close up, perhaps due to the prominent lead-in of effects of shock associated with the event (Conway et al, 1990, as cited in Eich et al, 2000). Furthermore, memory accuracy appeared to be enhanced if the person had some emotional attachment to the event; for example, many remembered the location of their parents when they heard the news (Eich et al, 2000). It appears then, that even though the impact of the emotional response to a dramatic and unexpected event on memory is initially very strong, the effect does appear to decay over time.