In contrast to the postitive influence on encoding in terms of flashbulb memory, powerful negative emotions may also potentially ongregate encoding of unpleasant events and induce forgetting or repression. It is proposed that the emotion of fear or anxiety could be an aversive stimulus, leading to conscious avoidance of a potentially dangerous situation (Wegner, 1994). This mechanism supports one of the most common non-technical words for emotional memory loss; represssion. Freud first introduced this concept in 1896, and subsequent empirical evidence has annealed Freud's dual systems approach; the notion of conscious, cognitive control on one hand, and involuntary, unconscious priming on the other (Wegner, 1994). Freud did not advocate forgetting of all unpleasant memories; he proposed that some events were so threatening that in order to cope with such experiences, people must develop two levels of control; one involves the conscious cognitive control of distaste or disgust which leads to avoidance, whereas the other involves unconscious processes by which the unpleasantness of an experience is forgotten (Jones, 1998). It has been argued that repression of traumatic memories is a very natural process, due to the way in which cognitive capabilities are exercised to protect the individual (Wegner, 1972). Wegner (1994) proposed two levels of voluntary conscious control; 'thought suppression' where events were simply consciously avoided, and 'interspersal', where ideas to be forgotten are 'buried' by concentrating on alternative, more pleasant, remembering tasks. Further evidence for the existence of repressed memories comes from studies of the accuracy of eyewitness testimony. Both Loftus and Ketcham (1991, as cited in Eich et al, 2000) and Loftus, Miller and Burns (1978; 1979 as cited in Eich et al ,2000) concluded that memory for personally experienced, potentially traumatic events can be notoriously inaccurate. In addition, it is generally accepted (Leenheer, van Berkel & Perrin, 1988, as cited in Eich et al, 2000) that if something has previously been imprinted in a person's memory and then forgotten due to psychological factors such as repression or dissociation, people's memories are often forgotten rather than replaced by new memories. The idea of psychologically induced forgetting therefore appears to be a credible mechanism.