Nonetheless, if, for now, one accepts the existence of memes and ignores such criticism, Blackmore's memetic model provides feasible and coherent explanations of a diverse range of phenomena that have traditionally proved difficult to explain in terms of biological evolution or individual genetic advantage (Edmonds, 2002). It has been argued that the development of human language, for example, does not conform to a Darwinian evolutionary explanation since it shows no genetic variation or selective advantage and cannot exist in intermediate forms (Blackmore, 1999). The same can be said of the excessively large human brain, which stands out greatly in comparisons of encephalisation with other primates. Most early theories suggest that toolmaking, technological advances and the human social environment, drove the need for a larger brain, whilst language is explained as a non-adaptive side consequence of the evolution of the brain, or as evolving as a response to selection pressure for improved communication between humans (Gould, 1997). However, Blackmore presents a memetic explanation. Memes compete to be copied, and people who are especially good at imitation gain a survival advantage by being able to copy the currently most useful memes. Since imitation is a difficult skill requiring extra brain power, the advantage is given to genes for bigger brains and better imitation. The genes were therefore forced into creating big brains, capable of spreading memes. Blackmore also proposes that the human language faculty primarily provided a selective advantage to memes, rather than genes. Successful replicators are those with high fidelity, longevity and fecundity. Digitisation of sounds into words may increase fidelity, combining words into novel combinations may improve fecundity, and every improvement leads to increased memetic competition. The memes that can get themselves spoken will be copied more than those that cannot, and people who can best copy the winning sounds have an advantage and pass on the genes that gave them that ability. Gradually, human brains would be driven by this emerging language. The development of language was thus an evolutionary process like any other, creating complex design apparently out of nowhere (Blackmore, 2003).