Previous research has more than adequately shown that the presence of others affects our behaviour (most influentially Allport, 1920; Zajonc, 1965). Specifically, studies have concluded that the competitive nature of human beings is provoked when in the company of other people (Triplett, 1898). This experiment aims to investigate how much of an increase in group size is necessary to make a difference to an individual's performance. In this experiment, 60 participants took part in a task where they were asked to put eight sets of four words in alphabetical order. They did this either alone, in the presence of one other person, or in the presence of four other people, who also performed the task. A significant decrease in the amount of time taken between each of the three conditions as the group size increases was predicted, as well as a decrease in accuracy as response times decreased. The results were analysed using one way ANOVA, and showed a significant effect of speed but not accuracy as a function of group size. These findings could affect performances in a variety of capacities, including in professional roles and home and academic life.
Introduction Previous research has more than adequately shown that the presence of others affects our behaviour in numerous ways. In particular, studies have concluded that the competitive nature of human beings is provoked when in the company of other people (Triplett, 1898). This experiment aims to investigate how much of an increase in group size is necessary to make a difference to an individual's performance. In this experiment, 60 participants took part in a task where they were asked to put eight sets of four words in alphabetical order. They did this either alone, in the presence of one other person, or in the presence of four other people, who also performed the task. A significant decrease in the amount of time taken between each of the three conditions as the group size increases was predicted, as well as a decrease in accuracy as response times decreased. The results were analysed using one way ANOVA, and showed a significant effect of speed but not accuracy as a function of group size. These findings could affect performances in a variety of capacities, including in professional roles and home and academic life.  Background The phenomenon of social facilitation has been argued over for years. As far back as 1898, Triplett noted that other people have an influence on individual performance (Triplett, 1898). His pioneering experiments with fishing reels demonstrated that people completed the task faster when in the presence of other people than when alone (Triplett, 1898).
This began in 1920, when Floyd Allport coined the term social facilitation. He conducted an experiment based on one of Triplett's earlier studies, and noted that children reeled in a fishing line more quickly when they were in a pairs condition than in an individual condition. Social facilitation focuses on the impact of social presence on individual performance (Aiello and Douthitt, 2001), and is one of the most effects most expounded when such effects occur in an individuals behaviour. Allport (1920) hypothesised that competition between people energises and improves performance, especially in motor tasks. Since then, Zajonc's drive theory (1965) has emerged as one of the most popular explanations for behaviour, second only to the work of Allport (1920) and Triplett (1898). The theory suggests that the mere presence of others gives rise to instinctive arousal, which motivates performance and behaviour (Zajonc, 1965). This influential theory proposed that other people increase the general drive and activation level of the actor (Strauss, 2002). The concept of a mere presence effect was studied further, suggesting that individuals are affected even when an audience is only physically present, and is passive and unresponsive (Robinson-Staveley and Cooper, 1990; Schmitt, Gilovich, Goore and Joseph, 1986), and that the effect is more pronounced if the audience turns out to be incidental rather than if the participants are aware of its presence (Markus, 1978). The research of Guerin (1986), proposes that an element of self-presentation is involved when the individual is placed in a social context. He cites this as the main concern in individual performance. Evidence from Geen and Gange (1977), Zajonc, Wolosin, Wolosin and Loh, (1970) and Seta, Paulus, and Schkade (1976), shows that conservation of risk taking increased when participants perceived themselves to be in small groups than when they were alone. This illustrates the natural inhibition which arises from contact with others.
It has been proposed that the presence of others can either be an energising factor or a source of inhibition, or a combination of the two. This theory is seen in the findings of Geen and Gange (1977), Seta, Paulus and Schkade (1976), and Zajonc, Wolosin, Wolosin and Loh (1970). They found that performance of an individual was related to how many people were present, and that the presence of others made participants more conservative in the tasks they chose or the ways they went about them. This insight comes from social facilitation, and was initially suggested by Allport (1920). The idea of competition and rivalry has been tested many times since the study of Triplett (1898). A plethora of studies have suggested that the presence of an opposing individual or group can increase performance, however the impact of the size of that group of people has largely been overlooked. In addition to this, research (Fairhurst and Sargeant, 1969; Williams and Rink, 1971) has suggested that response times to an action are shorter when the action is performed in the presence of other people than when it is performed alone. The findings of Geen and Gange (1977) also demonstrate that the presence of other people obliterates risk-taking behaviour. This is enlightening in the realm of behaviour, especially risky behaviour usually associated with the presence of others. The findings of Robinson-Staveley and
The results of such experiments have been seen to vary from person to person. For the last several decades, research focused on the individual rather than on the group as a whole (Guerin, 1982). An individual's fear of evaluation or performance anxiety emerged to explain why the mere presence of others affects performance (Dippold, 1924; Carver and Scheier, 1981; Ashby et al., 1950). Results of experiments such as these have enabled research to gain a greater understanding of the complex and privileged nature of individual behaviour (Guerin and Innes, 1982; Bond 1982; Clement Z, 1984). One concern is that the effects of social facilitation vary from study to study. While in some cases, it leads to improved performance (Triplett 1898; Allport 1920) in others, it has been shown to lead to worse performance (Schmitt, Gilovich, Goore, Josepha 1986; Robinson Staveley and Cooper, 1990). It has been suggested that this is because social facilitation tends to occur only with certain types of tasks, and therefore not with others (Baron 1986). Furthermore, even if the presence of others leads to improved performance, this is not always consistent (Henrich, Stich and Mark, 1991; Markus, 1978). The reasons for this could be that the presence of others can stimulate other underlying forces; forces that are not to do with performance, but rather with the effect of the presence of the other participants. This is an important aspect to bear in mind when considering the hypotheses of this experiment.
Despite these concerns, research on social facilitation has been extremely extensive and well supported. It is the pioneering work on the topic, as well as research on evaluation apprehension and mere presence effects that has given impetus to this study. One element of this phenomenon has received surprisingly little empirical attention - how many people are required to make a difference on the individual's performance. Though it is known an effect is definitely produced, the aim of this research was to uncover what actually makes performance change. Triplett's studies on competition may have yielded different results if the children were paired not only with one other child, but with three, four or five more children. This experiment aims to investigate the effects of social facilitation on three different group sizes in order to determine how many people are necessary for social facilitation to have an effect. Much research on the mere presence effect has suggested that the presence of another is all that is needed in order to affect performance. We wanted to examine the very crux of social facilitation theories, specifically at which point the element of competition and the influence of others arises, how this varies as a function of group size, and what exactly is involved in asserting the affects that are asserted. The aim of this study is to attend more specifically to the phenomenon of competitiveness via theories of social facilitation, and to discover how many people are necessary to produce such effects.
Method  A total of 60 undergraduates (36 males and 24 females) took part in the experiment. All participants were from the university, and they were split into three different conditions according to group size, with each condition consisting of 20 participants. Participants in condition 1 were tested in individual performance, condition 2 were tested in pairs, and condition 3 performed in groups of five. Each participant was read eight sets of four words and had 30 seconds to arrange them in alphabetical order. They were timed using a stop watch, and were scored on their accuracy.  Results
Methods  Participants  Sixty participants (30 males, 30 females) took part in this experimental study. None of them had any prior involvement in research. All of the participants were from the University of Aberdeen. Participants were split into three groups of 20 (20 in the one person condition, 20 in the two person condition and 20 in the five person condition). This split was gender balanced, with 10 males and 10 females in each condition. Participants were randomly assigned to each condition.  Design, materials and Procedure  The experiment was a within-subject design. Participants were asked to remember four sets of four words. Once memorised, they had to arrange each set of words into alphabetical order. This was done in either an individual, pairs or groups of five condition (see Appendix, Table 1). Participants were timed in order to understand the speed of completion, and accuracy was also recorded. The experimenters recorded the times for the individual and group conditions, but the pairs condition had self-timers which participants held while they were performing the task. Shortly after the task was completed, participants had the opportunity to compare scores and referee each other's answers.  Results  The results of the experiment were analysed using one way ANOVA, to determine the effects of group size on the amount of time taken and accuracy of completion. Data from the analysis was displayed in the Appendix (Table 2). Results of the ANOVA show a significant main effect of speed, F (2,57) = 3.745, p < .05, but there was no significant main effect of accuracy F (2,57) = 2.023, p > .05.  Discussion
Discussion
The results of this study can have far reaching implications. In professional and organisational roles, group size can matter immensely. Group meetings, conferences and even job changes can be undertaken more effectively if the size of the group influence is taken into account. This can also be useful in a home life setting. If for example, a parent requires their children to clean up, they may find it more effective to gather everyone in the room and have them help as a group, and this is backed up by the results of this study. Therefore, it can help to decide whether individual instruction or parent-led instruction is most necessary if an overall understanding of group sizes is taken into account. Equally, it has implications for more formal education. In educational facilities, classes can contain upwards of twenty five students at a time. Research (Schmitt, Gilovich, Goore and Joseph, 1986) shows that mere presence effects occur not only with physical activities, but also with mental activities, such as a typical school project. The results presented here can be used as a guideline for educational staff and teachers in deciding how many people should be gathered in one group. The results support the presence of mere presence effects, though they do not follow the traditional trend of social facilitation theory. They do however show that the presence of one person more than one's self has more of an effect on individual performance than when more people are present, up to a certain point.
The results also lead to uncertainty. While this study has conformed with a number of previous social facilitation theories, it has also demonstrated results that differ to the classic drive theories outlined by Zajonc (1965). The evidence, however, lies within the results. A low p value of 0.05 is indicative of a significant result, which indicates some support for the original hypothesis. The high means of accuracy in all conditions and the non-significant relationship between speed and accuracy could still supports drive theories, as Zajonc (1965) infers that the arousal from a task is higher and faster the more people are present. Therefore, in this task, accuracy reflects this theory, as it does not suggest whether the task has been completed correctly or incorrectly. The speed in which participants complete it is what reflects the effects of social facilitation. The insignificant difference between conditions 2 and 5 does however call into question the nature of the phenomenon, and suggests that when thousands of studies support a phenomenon, there may be more to it.
There are other ways to explain the non-significant main effect of accuracy. Social facilitation research in the past, including the inaugural Triplett study, involved physical tasks. For example, Martens and Landers (1968) and Carment (1970), found that in a muscle endurance task performed alone, in pairs or in groups of four, greater endurance was shown in the pairs or groups of 4 than in the individual performance. Physical tasks have no need to be measured in terms of their accuracy, so it could be that social facilitation only involves an increase in speed, not in the quality of the task. This is perhaps why sporting events are so successful, and work so well - participants are able to directly view the calibre of their competition. The non-significant accuracy result can, therefore, still be supported by research. This experiment involved a written task, but may have provided different results if answers were made more public, for example if participants had to call out their answers, or if they had to respond to an audio stimulus. One could object, however, that performance in a very simple task such as the one used in this experiment can not possibly be a predictor of people's complex and varied behaviour in real life. Equally, though, this can be countered, as one could argue that if the effects of social facilitation demonstrate themselves at such a simple level, the repercussions for more complex behaviour could be far greater. Something to consider may be to enlarge the differences between the group sizes in order to obtain a more pronounced effect. Instead of one, two and five people in each condition, perhaps doubling the number each time, for example testing five, ten and twenty people would demonstrate a more definite relationship between response times as an effect of group size. It is possible that after a certain level is reached, social facilitation and mere presence effects no longer have influence behaviour.