Nick Mills runs a small hydroelectric scheme in a Welsh valley. His present set-up uses a turgo turbine which drives a 230v AC output alternator. The voltage is stepped up to 400v AC to limit current losses along the 650m route up to the house, where it is stepped down again to 230v AC.
The turbine is driven by water travelling down the valley in a pipe, from a damn 40 meters vertically upstream. The current pipe is 365 metres long, comprising 45 metres of 6-inch (152mm) diameter pipe near the damn, and 320 metres of 4-inch (104mm) diameter pipe.
Nick is considering replacing the pipe with 6-inch (152mm) pipe, and connecting to the National Grid, to earn Renewable Obligation Certificates (ROCs).  Main Text
Although a hydro-scheme is installed at the site, the stream that is used by Nick Mills has not had flow rate measurements taken on it. Therefore one must develop an idea of the flow characteristics of the stream by looking at characteristics of a nearby river, i.e. the Ystwyth. Using the same exceedance data from here (Figure 1), one can scale it down by the difference in rainfall between the two rivers' catchment areas, and the different catchment area sizes (Appendix 1). This produces the data shown in Graph 1, which shows the exceeded flow rate for a given percentage time of the year.
In conclusion, upgrading Nick Mills' pipe from 4 to 6 inch would cost approximately ~ By going through with this upgrade, Nick will be able to access a larger proportion of the water flow of the river at any given time, with an estimated performance increase of 29%. In regards to the profitability of the upgrade, an estimate of 20 year to payback has been made, given that Nick Mills is already set up for a small hydro scheme and connected to the national grid. If Nick is to take advantage of renewable obligation certificates (ROCs), a dump load will be required to use the electricity available at times when less is being used, and again, the payback in this situation would be lowered.
Increasing the effective cross-sectional area of the pipe (from 4 to 5 inch) will increase its flow rate by a factor of 0.4.
The pipeline will be able to draw more of flow at a given river flow rate if it was replaced with 6-inch pipe.
The pipeline is able to draw more of the flow of the river at low river flow rates, as there will likely be excess capacity in the pipe
Other losses (i.e. air in the pipe) will influence the flow rate of the water in the pipe (Table 1), which cannot be accurately accounted for.
The run-off ratio of Nicks stream is the same as for the Ystwyth (0.4).
At some points in the year, i.e. the summer months, the pipe will collect nearly all the river flow.
When making decisions on equipments, Nick should consider the following: • The cost of materials and labour, that is, any extra costs of installing the new pipe. • The ability for the turbine/generator to make use of the increased flow rate. • The ability to make use of any subsidies and grants available. • How long the pipe and other components will last, and the cost of replacing them. • The potential long-term revenue streams and profits. • Any legal requirements to connect to the grid and the cost and implications of this. • The reliability of the turbine/generator, and any measures that can be taken to increase it. • The ability of the system to work with minimal manual intervention, in order to maximise ease of use. • The ability to earn ROCs and make use of dump loads. • Any environmental effects the installation may have on the local wildlife, and if/how these can be mitigated.
There are 24 million households - the average hourly energy use represents Nick's use.
Electricity can be sold to the grid for 2p per kWh at any time.
We take a constant percentage of river flow down pipe.
The data that is known for the current layout is:
The flow rate of the river was worked out (Figure 2) to be 0.0455m
The static water pressure is 3.83 bar (pressure at the turbine) The maximum flow rate of the turbine is 3m3/sec.
The exceedance curve is based on the information from the Ystwyth (Figure 1), scaled down by the differences in catchment area and rainfall. As a result, it is assumed this is a realistic representation of the stream at Nick's location. Table 2 is compiled from this exceedance curve. Power output The Turgo turbine that Nick uses has a maximum power output of 3.4kW with open sprint water. It is estimated by the turbine ratings (Table 3) that this turbine can produce 5.4 kWh/hour at this maximum flow rate. This is the maximum power this turbine is capable of producing.
Exceedance curve ratio calculated using data from the Ystwyth, see Appendix 1.
All these variables and presumptions go into creating Table 1 and 2. A glossary of the column headings can be found in Appendix 4. This model can then be used to predict the performance increase due to the increased pipe diameter. Using the assumptions I've made here, it is estimated that the installation of the new pipe, with Grid connection, will only become more profitable than the current system after 24 years (Graph 2).
To guarantee the stream will be used for hydroelectric production, Nick needs to install a penstock as close as possible to the damn and leave the damn open so that there is as little pressure built in the pipe as possible, allowing the same flow rate to be sent down the pipe to the turbine. The penstock also prevents turbulence in the downstream section as turbulence can decrease total pressure and hence flow rates through the turbine.  Nick should ensure there is a snifter valve at the damn end of the pipe, preventing debris from travelling down the pipe and damaging the turbine blades.
The metering of the electricity generated by the turbine would have to be carried out, and the readings recorded each month and sent to the regulator.
One way to maximise the accumulation of ROCs would be to implement a dump load system into the mains, so that under low or no-load conditions, the power available in the turbine is fed into an immersion heater for the house heating and hot water systems.
Recommendations
The power output to the grid would be unreliable, National Grid would be looking for a service which could be guaranteed for certain parts of the day, otherwise fines may be endorsed.
The voltage will have to be steps up from 230V to 400V, with the loss inefficiency estimated at 5-7%.
Fluctuations in the turbines frequency would mean the unit has to be electronically controlled when switching on or off, either by gradually introducing it to the Grid at each switch-on to synchronise the generator, using pulse-width modulation, or rectifying the AC, variable-frequency current to DC and then inverting it to AC at 50Hz.
The cost of new turbines would be too great for what is planned here. A new turgo turbine would cost in the region of A fully installed turbine would cost in the region of One option would be to run a centrifugal pump as a turbine. This would involve running a normal water pump at roughly 50rpm above its rated speed, with a maximum power output of 0.7 of the rated power consumption. For a pump that can produce up to 2kW as a turbine, this would cost roughly This will be increased to take account of electronics involved in controlling the frequency of the power output, as it would now be higher than 50Hz.
In order to upgrade the penstock to 6-inch all the way, a few decisions need to be made. Firstly, what kind of pipe would be used to replace the current penstock? Pipes with an outside diameter which matches the current pipe (¾” pipe wall) could be used, such as polyethylene medium-density polyethylene (MDPE) pipe, or alternatively 4” schedule 40 PVC pipe. Both pipe types are suitable for the job, as MDPE commonly has a stated working pressure of 10 bar, far exceeding the maximum working pressure of the pipe in this situation, (2.8 bar) and PVC pipe generally has a pressure rating of up to 2.5 bar. There are advantages and disadvantages for both these pipes, MDPE is more expensive, but easier to direct over long distances, while PVC is cheaper but needs to be direct in shorter runs, and bends need to compensated for. Both pipes are easy to join, however PVC needs glues and primer, while MDPE only needs pushing together. The reference data for these pipes can be found in Appendix 2 and 3.  Lastly, another decision is which route to travel from the damn upstream to the turbine house, and where to put in the new pipe. There is already a mostly manageable looking route for the pipe, downstream of some of the steeper sections of terrain through a couple of tunnels and over boulder fields. Re-routing this would involve extra work, and specialised equipment which is not only expensive but may not be able to fit in some sections.
All factors seem to cancel each other out apart from the cost difference, as the ease to join the PVC pipe is overshadowed by the number of joins and directing their would be compared to MDPE pipe. For ease of installation alone, MDPE would be recommended over PVC pipe.
The costs for this upgrade starts with the cost of the pipe, at ~ this is more than double the cost of the current 4in pipe. This would need to include snifter valves, control valves, a bypass pipe from the dam, and insulation. The total cost of all components, including installation, would cost in the region of ~ It is worth noting that there may be grants available for such an installation, although these are unlikely to cover the full cost of replacing the existing pipeline.
The possibility of a grant to aid in the installation costs of a small hydro scheme is a reality, however it would not be possible to get one in this situation as the turbine and damn are already installed, as the grant is only possible for new installations using materials and contractors approved by the granting authority.
From a component-by component point of view, the item that will need upgrading/replacing sooner than the rest will be the turbine and generator. There is already significant leakage from the seal joining the two halves of the turbine, and any repair is compromised by the substantial corrosion of the studding and bolts. The state of the turbine blades inside will be compromised by debris flowing down the pipe. While this has been addressed at the damn end, the snifter valve has been left open for debris to fall into it. The MDPE pipe should last out for 50 years, should it not suffer any significant damage, which is unlikely given that logging in that area was only recent.
Nick also needs to look at the transformer step-up voltage. The efficiency of the transformer is dependant on its load, and the higher the input voltage, the higher the efficiency. The current transformer has a set 230v AC voltage output, but raising this to 400v AC should improve efficiency. The cost of a 400VAC transformer will depend on the current and the voltage required, and as it is more efficient, it will reduce electricity loss.
This is a pricey option which may not be recommended, though it would depend on the users' needs and how much power is required. Connection to the National Grid would be an option, but would be pricey, as one cannot connect to the grid direct (costing ~ However, this has been modelled for both the 4" and 6" pipe, and shows that even with the extra costs involved, the 6" pipe will not pay itself back until after 30 years. Nick must also consider whether the pipeline will last this long, if decides on PVC pipe, it may need to be replaced a lot sooner. He should also consider the longevity of the turbine, which is subject to external corrosion and data from debris passing into the snifter valve.
The option of registering for ROCs should definitely be considered. This would allow Nick to earn revenue from his turbine power output without having to connect to the Grid. The dump load system which keeps the turbine output at it's maximum ensures revenue earned will be optimum. Nick should contact OfGEM for more information and read Appendix 5.
Overall it is hard to predict the behaviour of the pipe if it was replaced with a 6" without a full understanding of the flow properties of the pipe throughout the year, i.e. the air to water content of the fluid. But using models with the best guestimation for yearly flow, it is shown that the upgrade of pipe would produce a 29% performance increase, however this benefit will only be shown at high (winter) flow rates.