In negotiating the post-war political landscape of Eastern Europe, the western powers revealed an ambiguous attitude. Although historians still disagree on whether diplomatic misunderstandings between the allies of the east and west eventually caused the emergence of a cold war, or whether a gradual loss of influence in Eastern European countries was the reason for its outbreak, As former Polish Prime Minister in exile Miko
During the second world war, Stalin, Churchill and Roosevelt had held much promise for the freedom and liberty of the post-war era. At the Tehran conference in 1943, the 'Big Three' agreed that 'the interests of the liberated peoples must have equal weight with the legitimate interests of the former rulers' and that 'governmental authorities broadly representative of all democratic elements in the population and of other segments in the population must be established'. The intentions behind these 'Democratisation Agreements' were however soon violated. The disputes which ensued between the 'Big Three' at Yalta already revealed a certain change in the Soviet policy: instead of opposing a coalition government of representatives from all legitimate parties in Poland, Stalin began to favour the Lublin committee, the 'self-constituted government of the country', and to argue, in agreement with Roosevelt, that the legislative assembly should consist of 'non-partisan personalities', which he interpreted to mean communist or pro-Soviet parties. Briefly put, he advocated the domination of communists in the post-war interim administration in that country.
Britain, too, found itself in a difficult moral position between its mid-war pledges to the Polish government that '"His Majesty's Government do not recognize any territorial changes which have been effected in Poland since August, 1939"', Miko
In the eastern regions however, the most important factor in determining post-war governments was the presence of the Red Army. It has been argued that, as the Red Army entered into designated Soviet spheres of influence in Eastern Europe with its plans of liberation, the place of the liberating forces in determining the situation of the communist parties was increasingly politicised. As the Red Army took control of Lithuania, Romania, and Bulgaria, they imposed the commissar system, replacing civilian administrations with a military one. This gave Moscow a direct control over the region and provided the new governments with legitimacy, which was not necessarily based on the popular democratic choice, as the populations of the respective countries had not been given the opportunity to exercise their will. Moscow's treatment of Poland is an example of this. As the Red Army advanced further, regaining a sizable part of the country, the Lublin committee, had already declared its authority and was thus allowed to remain in power. The composition of the government was thus determined by the Soviet Union's desire for a government loyal to Moscow, rather than the will of the people. But according to Miko Miko The effects of these changes were felt almost immediately, with east European liberation becoming a synonym for the success of the communist parties and the growing prominence of Soviet alliance. Britain, in particular, was damaged in the eyes of East European countries. Despite having made several commitments to the Polish government, the British acted with little haste when it came to getting Polish citizens back to their homes. This perceived slow assistance on behalf of Britain prompted a cooling of political relations and led to the Poles viewing 'Britain as an antagonist of almost equal magnitude to the Soviet Union'.
Acting from a conviction that any liberated territory immediately became of concern solely for the liberating nation,
Stalin's interpretation of 'governmental authorities broadly representative of all democratic elements' Toward the end of the war, Moscow, defying the "London Poles", backed the establishment of a new interim government,
Tulgan A unified Yugoslav government, meanwhile, had emerged as early as July 1944; it was led by a National Liberaton Committee which consisted of all major parties, 'Jeivrovi Despite the National Liberation Committee's declaration of allegiance to the Soviet Union on July 8th 1944, 'the degree of autonomy left to the Yugoslavs was considerable'. In Poland, the situation was different. On the 22nd of July 1944 the Red Army invaded Poland, and from this point onwards it became increasingly clear that the Soviet Union had already 'decided to impose a Communist regime upon Poland'. The so-called 'Lublin Committee' was formed and turned into a new provisional governing body. With full Soviet military backing, it set out leading a 'campaign to de-legitimise the pre-war government in London and expose its alleged incompetence and corruption'.
With the crushing of 'the leadership of the historic political forces and their military infrastructure' In March 1945 the Soviet Union signed a treaty of friendship with Lublin Committee;
May 1945, therefore saw a new development in Stalinist plans for Eastern Europe; one that compromised Western ideals of democracy and sovereignty of the victorious great powers alike.
Up to this point, we have primarily looked at the situation in Poland, which, for many western politicians, had become 'the test case of Soviet intentions'. As has been pointed out, in discussions following up on these divisions, British and Soviet foreign ministers Eden and Molotov were unable to reach an eventual agreement which satisfied both demands. In March 1945, an acting regency was agreed, consisting of 'three members, one Croat, one Serb, and one Slovene [who], though non-communists, were all nominees of Tito'. With the help of the Red Army, they 'dispersed, disarmed, or forced the exodus of Mihailovi Moreover, 'the communists, though they might share government [in a coalition], would not share power'. The Red Army had retreated from Yugoslavian territory, and Tito, though deferential to Stalin, 'had formed views of his own and had no hesitation in expressing them, even when they contradicted those of Stalin himself'.
In turn, Czechoslovakia had been under German occupation since March 1939. Communists there enjoyed by far less popular favour than in other countries. The Czech National Socialist party had been part of the government before the German occupation and only when the Red Army neared the Czech borders would the communists, helped by the Soviet-sponsored Czech National Council, proclaim a Committee of National Liberation in April 1945.  The election of [Edvard] Benes as president promised the establishment of a democratic system of government. Although it was Stalin's hope that the Czechoslovak government would become increasingly communist, the modernising Benes, in the words of Miko Communists were only allowed to join the government towards the end, and Benes' policy towards the party was that of the 'brotherhood of brotherhoods'. As a result, the Czechoslovak Communist Party, whom the Red Army had admitted to the National Council in much the same manner as in Poland, received relatively few government positions. However, this was shortly to change, as will become clear after a look at the economic slavery imposed by the Soviet Union. In 1945, Czechoslovakia became the unwilling victim of aggressive industrialisation programmes resembling those of the Soviet Union, Miko Czechoslovakia and Yugoslavia were not, however, the only Eastern European countries which had to undergo drastic changes at the end of hostilities. In Bulgaria, elections by universal suffrage had taken place in October 1944, and the communist-dominated 'Fatherlands Front' won the majority of the votes. Nonetheless, its leader, I. M. Bulgarov, still insisted on assuming power as a member of a coalition government. Miko Nevertheless, the combination of politico-economic restrictions imposed by the Red Army und Ulbricht's radical political ideas, fuelled by the increasing distrust of the western powers, hastened the breakdown of all non-communist opposition. In East Germany In May 1945, Churchill had resolved to form a neutral, democratic, and independent Czechoslovakia,   The same policy of toleration was implemented in Hungary too. In May 1945 the Budapest government initially postulated its full independence. In February 1945, however, the Soviet Union installed Hungary's first communist leader, M. Rajk, chairman of the Peace Party, as prime minister. Again, the Soviet Union insisted on Soviet advisors in the government, although granting a degree of executive autonomy to the Hungarian government due to its relative lack of any significant recent collaboration with the Third Reich.  The Polish and Yugoslavian cases were somewhat different. Throughout the whole of the Second World War, the Poles were under sole, direct German occupation and, as has been established, were given no chance to influence their own political development. Upon the Red Army's liberation of Poland, the Muscovite-endorsed Lublin committee and the Soviet-backed Polish Committee of National Liberation soon clashed over the nation's future. Miko Despite this, an agreement to pursue a further communisation of Czechoslovakia was yet to be reached during Stalin's visit of Potsdam in July 1945,  The Czech and Slovak nation had already become an unwilling victim of the Soviet Economic Commission which was sent to Czechoslovakia with the mission to summon all mandatory calculations of industrial production in an effort to promote collectivisation the economy was greatly accelerated and the powerful economic foundations of the non-communist parties were soon to be ruined. In April and June, the Slovak Usher-Dog, the Hlinka Guard, Ilko Štembera was released from police custody and allowed to take office again, In the same month, a Slovak communist party (SCKP) was finally announced. Its spokesman, Joseph Stichek, was also successful in a parliamentary motion of no-confidence which led to the restriction of the powers of the cabinet and placed the Slovak National Council more firmly on the path of communisation. The non-communists had soon abandoned the Fatherland Front and whenever they spoke out against the SCKP, they were condemned as 'bourgeois reactionaries'.   In Hungary, though there were elections in 1945 and the pre-war government regained control in the first months of 1945, Miko At the end of the war, Eastern Europe found itself confronted with Stalinism. In a bid to end the historical anomalies of the region once and for all, Stalin maintained his assertive security policy which aimed to shift the Soviet borders closer to the heart of Europe. This dream had been the basis of the 1939 Molotov-Ribbentrop pact, and, after the war, the Soviet Union was even more determined to impose its political influence onto its liberated neighbours.  Partly due to a diplomatic misunderstanding between the east and west, partly due to the totalitarian intentions of the Soviet Union, Stalin perceived the Cold War as a natural continuation of the western policy of containment directed against the Soviet sphere of influence even before the war.   In terms of their actual mode of communisation, Eastern European countries followed different paths in the period after the war. In Poland, the AK were suppressed and contacts with sympathetic politicians in the west were broken. The Polish government-in-exile in London was officially declared redundant,  In Czechoslovakia, a gradual, almost liberal communisation took place,  In the same month, the communists, in dialogue with President Gottwald, had outlined plans for the Prague Manifesto;  In Hungary, too, the communists took control gradually, until in late 1947,   Bulgaria, in juxtaposition, was much more lenient in its incorporation of the communists into the government.  The Yugoslavian case, however, was by far the most ideal for Stalin. Both prior to and during the war, there had been a strong resistance movement and partisan fighters
This policy turned out to be only one of buying time. Despite the relative moderateness and tolerance of Gottwald's communists, the Soviet Union continued to press for further advances to communisation.
In a combination of open diplomatic dialogue, pressure, and unrestricted support, the Soviet Union's actions were instrumental in the transformation of the southeastern European countries eastern zone countries of Poland, Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania, and Czechoslovakia. In 1945 and 1946 Stalin justified the resulting pro-communist governments of Eastern Europe as natural consequents of liberations, revolutions, and democratic elections. Miko Concurrently, just as the Soviet Union did not openly interfere in its neighbour nations internal affairs, the western powers followed a negligent diplomatic policy towards the area. By not daring to take any decisive actions, they allowed the Soviets to keep on acting uniformly with their 'real politics' in Eastern Europe. Although the United States 'had some knowledge of what was going on, it was not prepared to become involved'. The west's tendency to provide the eastern countries with ties of diplomatic recognition, without proper monitoring of the liberating countries' internal affairs and mentioning of the expulsion of non-communist opposition, was certainly a mistake. Especially, when considering 'the world was still in the dark as to the relationship of the Lublin Poles to their traditional government in exile' In addition, the institutional support of Stalin during the Potsdam Conference of July 1945, which showed no firm attitude towards the complete Soviet control of Eastern Europe, was interpreted as tacit agreement.
Czechoslovakia, similarly to Yugoslavia, also moved under soviet control through communist-regime-sponsored domestic initiatives. Nonetheless, the manœuvring of Soviet troops into Eastern Europe had only been possible through the passive strategy of the western allies. No instances of direct confrontation can be established in this period.
May 1945 saw the beginnings of a realisation that Soviet unilateral activities in Eastern Europe had to be confronted. However, whilst Stalin had already been active with his communisation plans as territories were being liberated, the Truman administration still resisted the harsher anti-Soviet line held by the British around May 1945. The late recognition and reluctance to take responsibility of the Americans may thus have been the deciding factor in the eventual communisation of the countries in Eastern Europe.