While it is certain that the reformation which set off in the twenties of the fifteenth century was preceded by more than a century of humanism challenging, among other things, man's attitude toward theological issues, the extent and influence of the humanist movement are still a matter of debate.
The first traces of the humanist movement can be discerned in the works of Petrarch. An Italian scholar and poet, Petrarch considered the works of classical writers such as Cicero to be the essence of a Christian life, a life which should be 'well spent and guided by faith'. Similarly, Erasmus' own humanist pursuits concentrated on correcting the pedantry of medieval teachings - a project which was to lead to its own reformation. While Italy was an important center of humanist activity, among other places, Germany had its own flourishing tradition of humanistic scholarship. The most notable figures of this German academic movement were Ulrich von Hutten and Conrad Celtis. Hutten was a poet who praised the German language and its past; Celtis, in addition to contributing to the national anthropological discourse, was also a prolific scholar, teacher and publisher of books. The works of both authors formed an important part of the national humanist legacy which Germany bequeathed to the reformation movement.
The birth of Humanism in Germany was much different than in Italy; firstly, its meaning and sign were geared more towards a technical application of classical linguistic versions than using classical Greek and Latin to create a new form of literary writing, mainly used by theologians and philosophers. Furthermore, the spiritual reform that gradually ensued in German territory came to acts as underlay for the later reform, and as Luther was to write that 'so-called 'theology' of Christ and of the gospel had been completely forgotten', the solution could only come thought the study of the scriptures. This was to be an endeavour requiring the close study of the Greek sources by trained philologists. Consequently, by the end of the fifteenth century the intellectual life of parts of Germany had become quite cosmopolitan, with the new movement of humanism spreading from Prague, over Vienna, to Basel. From the Universities of Prague and Vienna had come for example Zwingli, the Swiss reformer, while William Reuchlin from Pforzheim was becoming famous with his Greek-oriented studies and transformation of Hebraic studies. Moreover, by the mid fifteenth century, Germany had become capable of producing fine output of Latin composition, often adhering higher standards of learning than much of European provinces. Thus we find Johannes Reuchlin in the forties teaching, besides German and Latin, Greek, Hebrew and some Aramaic in 'picturesque Heidelberg'.
While this links humanism and reformation, the exact relation between the two originated much earlier. Already in antiquity, scholasticism had stressed the importance of the classical Latin language for the proper transmission of religious dogmas and usage of ecclesiastical rituals. It was this scholarly legacy that the humanists of Cologne and Leipzig were quick to adopt in order to modify the religious tradition and thereby modernise the liturgy. This included a shift to sermon-style orations, and the introduction of more refined Latin in religious theoretical works. Critics have argued that it was this same tendency which fixed the inspiration for a reformation within the minds of an entire generation of readers and listeners.
Historians have argued that '[t]o a certain extent, the reformers were simply confirming the advances made by the Humanist agenda, with its stress on ancient languages, its tools of exegesis and its approval to the sources'. Consequently, we find that Erasmus freely criticised the incorporation of pagan elements into the Christian faith, and the complicity of the clergy in these practices: 'so it be of ghosts, spirits, goblins, devils, or the like; [...] the further they are from truth, the more readily they are believed and the more do they tickle their itching ears. And these serve not only to pass away time but bring profit, especially to mass priests and pardoners'. 'How much more properly did the apostles call themselves servants of the present Christ', he wrote in an open letter to pope Leo X, 'and not [like the clergy] vicars of an absent Christ?'.
On a note, however, it must be added that much of the question of the relation between humanism and the reformation depends on definition. Kristeller has rightly pointed out that humanism, taken in a broad definition, 'was not [...] Catholic or Protestant, [...] although it is easy to find [for both of them] a certain number of humanists who favoured them'. Naturally, humanist achievements did much to aid reformist criticism of the church, thereby unintentionally damaging the pope's authority as ultimate arbiter of religious matters.
Factors that had been present for centuries in the life of medieval people, such as the intellectual and religious efflorescence that had developed in late medieval religious orders, as well as the generalised feeling of unrest among the masses due to high taxes and religious corruption, helped in the transformation of the Europe of the middle ages into the Europe of modernity during the Reformation.  The appearance of the humanist movement in northern Europe, more than a century before the Reformation, was one of the most important factors influencing the course of history. Humanists brought with them a new language for discussing theological issues, introducing the concept of a 'pure religion', as well as the tools for critically studying religious texts. Italian humanists brought techniques of philology to Germany, and the desire to reform the Latin language. Such linguistic reform, and the humanists' urge to rediscover and immerse themselves in ancient texts and, more generally, in the power of the human mind, challenged man's attitude toward theological matters. Alongside the intellectual reforms, humanism also stirred a spirit of national identity, that is, of a distinct German identity, as humanists praised Germany's pious and learned traditions.
The spread of these new ideas came hand in hand. While many humanists, trained and educated in Italy, brought up 'questions that [...] were discussed openly and debated in public', 'All classes in Christendom, After all, since Luther refuted the idea that any active works or confession were of any importance in an individual's relationship to God, this discredited the authority of the church as a body of absolute mediation.
To conclude, the role of humanism in preparing the ground enabling a reformation to take place in Germany and the rest of northern Europe was very great. Despite the fact that many a humanist was, and remained, supportive of the church in Rome, the humanist challenges to education, thereby firmly establishing the Moreover, many of the humanist values were shared by the reformation movement. The emphasis on text-based studies was of key importance to Luther ( Indeed, Luther's ideas and style of criticism of the church bore such semblance to humanist traditions, that the first period of clash saw the support of many humanists, which has been described as a 'productive misunderstanding', which, additionally, brought much attention to the Wittenberg disputation through the humanists' extensive correspondence network.
The exact relation between humanists and reformers has been a matter of dispute among scholars of our time. It depends, firstly, on a definition of humanism. While humanism knew certain general traits, it was not necessarily confined by a certain theological outlook, and the humanist movement was never united on theological matters. In fact, the period after the reformation saw the emergence of a number of prominent Protestant humanists. Thus, we can say humanism and reformation were mutually influencing, the reformer often using humanist tools in his pursuits, while many humanists, often demonstratively Teutonic, admired the reformation movement.