The emergence of the sociological school of ethnomethodology in the early 1960s created a shock wave across the sociological establishment. Its revision of social norms and their relation to the social action springing from individual cases of social interaction was indeed deemed so radical that stories exist of 'ethnomethodologists being fired from their jobs simply because they were ethnomethodologists' (Craib 1992: 102). However, what may at first glance appear a drastically individualistic approach to social relations theory must be seen as embedded within a wider philosophical and social scientific critique of the value of conventional types of knowledge (Alexander 1987).
At its centre, questions concerning the limitations of conventional approaches to constructing social knowledge take form. Relevancy, in this case referring to the accepted manner of knowledge attribution, governs the social scientist's deduced ability to construct a satisfactory and meaningful account of the phenomena under consideration. The situation of such vast limitations inspires ethnomethodologists to 'fill in some of the gaps left by conventional decision-oriented sociology' (Cicourel 1973: 101) by looking more closely at the 'knowledgeability' of everyday actors (Garfinkel 1967). In doing so, not only does the individual become the locus of attention, but also does the way in which this individual then relates to others surrounding him or her by means of typification and interpretation of social variables and event, eventually forming a 'structure of meaningful interaction' (Silverman 1972: 170).
By failing to observe the complication characteristic of such norm-attribution, sociologists fall into the trap of taking sets of typification for granted, thereby tacitly avoiding the 'problem of concealed, commonsense commitments' (Coulter 1979: 15) to which all social actors involved conform. Instead, according to ethnomethodologists, the only way to avoid adding to such a body of affirmative "folk sociology" is to 'seek to understand the Such a methodology abstains from explaining social phenomena in immediate relation to abstract, theoretical norms, deriving actual interaction from alternative, everyday commonsensical approaches to social interaction, which have also been described as "second-order typifications", 'typifications of our common-sense typifications which order the social world in a rational way' (Craib 1992: 99-100). Instead of taking methods of social ordering for granted, the sociologist may then concern himself or herself with 'the manner in which members
In his article "The convict code among inmates of a halfway house" (1974), Robert Wieder offers a case-study of the workings of what he calls 'the alleged code of behaviour among hard-core, male, felons', which serves as an indexical interpretative tool for understanding residents' interactions with the staff of a "halfway house". In the essay, Wieder makes an attempt to uncover the workings of a behavioural code which he claims to have been widely accepted by the residents involved in his case-study. Residents, according to Wieder, referred to it when they encountered staff in the facility in order to "tell the code" (Wieder 1974:148). By this, Wieder understands a set of norms of interaction which informed their actions, and which, instead of being explicated, were performed. Thus, the 'convicts described norms of behaviour and relationships in terms of what they do in terms of what a "man" does or does not do, what is proper or improper (Wieder 1974: 151).  The importance that Wieder gives the "code" should be seen as characteristic of the ethnomethodological approach to sociology. This approach contends that 'through our daily negotiations of the many conflicting 'secular' values of contemporary society, and through developing 'standards' or 'lines of conduct' to sanction and guide such conflicts, we become members of significant social groups' (Craib 1992: 104). It, therefore, follows that where societies are placed in precarious, instable situations, an acute sense of meta-social norms obtains. Wieder sees the convict code as part of such an instance, as 'nothing stands so greatly in need of justification as criminal acts' (Wieder 1974: 150). Indeed, constantly facing a "dilemma of aloneness" (Silverman 1972: 174) in the facility, a sense of community was rendered necessary. The convict code offered exactly that: a lexicon of behavioural norms in which the struggle of alienated individuals could be guided, structured and justified.  In the setting of Wieder's case-study, in which inmates occasionally found themselves in interaction with staff and other residents, the convict code possessed the function of both a system of behavioural norms and, simultaneously, an interpretative tool of such norms. This function, Wieder explains, first of all, served as a shield of uncooperativeness when confronted with questions asked by staff: 'talking the code was one form [...] of verbal positioning in order to resist being placed by staff into particular social identities' (Wieder 1974: 156). However, Wieder also finds discrepancies between the actual enactments of the convict code and its stipulations as reported by residents. This he interprets as residents' attempts to deploy the code in order to 'thwart the members' attempts at exercising authority' (Wieder 1974: 157). This situational interpretation of the codes should not be confused with its reference to a more disturbing background of power relations. Wieder recognises that 'the code is always employed as an attendant rationale for challenging institutional authority - as a concrete social device by collective actors to protect collective interests' (Wieder 1974: 164).
In his 1974 article, Wieder transcribed the "convict code" (the code of accepted behaviour among its participants) of a self-governed, rehabilitative halfway-house for drug addict felons on parole, as it was presented to him by the residents. In doing so, he raises various interesting questions about the precise nature of social norms, and the degree to which they are recursive, fleeting, and fluid. Wieder's piece emphasises a very personal, situational approach to his case study, providing a vivid account of his first impressions of the facility and the everyday behaviour determined by it. Thus, as ethicist Alexander notes, Wieder's piece serves an 'important and serious purpose: not to bury the code but to accept and understand it as an integral part of the overall context within which the study was undertaken' (Alexander 1987: 269).
Although "telling the code" could theoretically denote a wide range of activities, Wieder is able to consider it as an all-encompassing umbrella term for the social interaction that occurred within the facility, as 'the consent to use this resource showed itself in all social activity' (Wieder 1974: 164). By utilising "telling the code" as a means of explaining social events, the residents were able to construct meaning through shared understandings of '"what goes on"' (Wieder 1974: 152): an interpretative matrix applicable for explaining the "transactions" between staff and residents. From this standpoint, the analysis of "telling the code" then becomes examination of the 'strategic devices which would enable one to grasp the peculiarity of everyday life' (Garfinkel 1967: 7). The core of the convict code is, according to Wieder, the recognition of a mutual 'expectancy of distrust' (Wieder 1974: 155) between staff and residents in the facility. This tension becomes noticeable by two tactics, '...the strategy of defiance and the strategy of cooperation' (Wieder 1974: 151), on the side of the residents. Compulsory activities, such as drug testing and chore obligations, are viewed as incursions into the domain of the resident, who 'reacts against incursions by remaining distant and uncommunicative' (Wieder 1974: 153). On the other hand, Wieder has residents employ a more conciliatory approach to staff on 'informal and peripheral matters' (Wieder 1974: 153). Here, stereotypical modes of behaviour such as complimenting -the food- or some activity that reflects to a point at which it is hardly worthwhile in terms of its effort/yield ratio - are
This tension was in fact exacerbated by the presence of a third party, in this case the sociologist, who, as he recognised himself, held 'paralleled access to two sets of naturally occurring conversations' (Wieder 1974: 171). While one conversation between Wieder and the resident is a "public" one, in which resident and sociologist engage in behaviour which appears to confirm the existing structure of norms (labelled by Wieder as "the code"), behind the scenes in a private conversation, we find a different level of conversation, one that incorporates an unrestricted range of possibilities for manipulating the code when necessary. In this regard, Wieder describes the interaction between staff and residents as 'a sociological demonstration of ordinary circumstances' (Wieder 1974: 161). Hereby, Wieder reflects on the relationship between the convict code as an interpretative tool and its meaning in actual practices of norm attribution.
One possible difficulty with Wieder's description of the convict code serving as a kind of supra-personal "accounting" schema is that it implies a degree of homogeneity which does not always befit the dynamic nature of "real-life" social behaviour. Wieder himself admits that '[e]vidence of the fragility of [the convict code's] veneer was seen in the uncertainty that attended any serious breach of its "taboos"' (Wieder 1974: 151). The staff's handling of such violations borders the precipitous and often provides a heart-rending insight into the "precariousness of human interaction" (Cicourel 1973: 105). In such cases, staff had to confront residents with a reflexive questioning of the very meaning of 'the code's' principles. Framing social interactions around a concept of 'the code' provided enough valid reason to either interact with the residents, or to sharply react.
A closer view on the interplay which holds "the code" together reveals certain clear similarities between it and other societies. As the environment of the "halfway house" is one in which much deviant behaviour takes place, it follows that, in order to create or at least maintain a system of order, enforcement is necessary. This enforcement uses a variety of methods to control behaviour, including 'disciplinary sanctions and rewards, sanctions and rewards postulated as decisional strategies of gaining compliance' (Cicourel 1973: 9-10). In the case of the "code system", residents comply with the accepted norms of behaviour, such as loyalty to other residents, in order to benefit from it. In doing so, they couple with 'an individual's need to maintain recognition of his/her self-identity' (David in Cicourel 1973: 14). That is, he or she 'immediately enters into a relationship of a collective body in order to manifest a tangible identity' (David in Cicourel 1973: 14). However, such an identity has to be flexible and readily transferable. 'The "defensive esteem' of self is ordinarily achieved by the adherence to sources of evaluation which are socially organized and have certain general acceptance' (Cicourel 1973: 14). These expressions, virtually logically, are accomplished through the adherence to the convict code, which 'serves the same purposes as the disciplines of religion, art, literature, folklore and other humanistic activities, that is, to provide an occasion for meaningful patterns of accomplishment and achievement' (David in Cicourel 1973: 15).
While this "professional" rationale placed a certain amount of order upon resident-staff interaction, it was also subject to "intimate" influences, which 'involve[d] unknowns of a less definable kind' (Wieder 1974: 161). These were instances of interpretation in which staff's own 'maintenance of the institution and [their] own role and security within it come to be very important' (Alexander 1987: 273). In such cases, 'the convictions and value-interpretations of the participant observer - [whereby] interpretations come to depend upon My own assessment of Wieder's account is that it highlights the largely tacit character of social "allocation". We are all familiar with the notion that in any kind of social interaction, norms are present which can be called upon in the interpretation of behaviour. In this case, we can see how, in the facility, the convict code, 'told' and 'untold by staff and residents alike, was somehow a guide for all participants' (Wieder 1974: 163). However, by focussing on the dependence of such interpretation, Wieder, by analogy, points to the ongoing negotiation of social meanings that takes place between the various social actors involved. Since 'meaning is not transferred from one person to another [...] but is constantly being constructed through interaction between [...] two people' (Coulter 1979: 11), the indexing proposed by ethnomethodology acknowledges a form of "tacit knowledge" that proceeds from the logic of everyday experience.
Thus, "telling the code" becomes both a powerful tool and a warning. Its inherently shaky foundation in terms of both content and form reveals it as a means of manipulation, of which Wieder claims that one of its goals 'may be understood as an effort to convince staff and myself that 'this is so' and/or to 'defend' against potential staff challenge regarding 'this is so'' (Wieder 1974: 151). Besides this, it can, however, also be used in order to protect prisoners, as staff learned to use their power in conjunction with norms, 'in its more humane aspect as a way to 'excuse' violations, to 'protect' one prisoner at the expense of another' (Wieder 1974: 152). Thus, Wieder sees "the code" as, at once, both a fragile structure of power asssersenment, and a protective shield that guards individuals from even harsher measures.
The darker, more precarious side of social interaction lies in the tensions of power underneath its surface. Ethnomethodology does not deny the existence of a "common culture", and this would be an absurd claim to make (Alexander 1987: 262); however, the precariousness of social interaction is exactly that what this "common culture" is not: individuals may challenge the existing order by either directly confronting it, or, more subtly, by manipulating its general traits to their advantage. Whether this challenge is pursued consciously or not is, strictly spoken, not relevant; as Pitkin asserts, 'One may have to intend to lie in order to lie, but one need not intend to deceive in order to deceive' (Pitkin in Coulter 1979: 12). An analogy may here be found in the functioning of penal codes, in that 'the fit is 'managed' through negotiating socially organized activities' (Cicourel 1973: 13) in which both hidden and open methods of manipulation are used.
In his study, Wieder demonstrates how he fell for the all-too-easy trap of the assumed authority and legitimacy of the convict code. In doing this, he seemed to forget the power it is has in 'the ways in which persons select from the significance system available to them, how they develop their own ways of appropriating that system, and the ways in which they use this knowledge to the exclusion of those not so fortunate as to possess an understanding of it' (Alexander 1987: 277). This also applies to the staff of the halfway house. Though possessing an understanding of the code, its actual ability of explanation was found to be limited
In assuming the '"adequate" or "appropriate" operational definitions' (Silverman 1972: 177), staff of the "halfway house" avoided facing up to the existential question of where this appropriateness was derived from. Thus, Wieder can ultimately only conclude one thing: ''Telling the code' masked what was 'really going on' at the halfway house - what was 'really going on' was residents' pursuing their immediate interests by fabricating instances of 'telling the code' which deceived me and the staff' (Wieder 1974: 169).
By looking at the example of the code, Wieder reveals how the norms of interaction described as "the code" are quite literally the product of negotiation. This process, however, is constrained by the paradox that the residents must agree with the code in order to engage in it. It also throws up questions over the subjective fluidity of the convict code, and the power relationships implicit in its operation. Thus,
This problem brings under discussion the extent to which the freedom to negotiate socials norms actually exists. Regarded as a whole, society can be said to be rather more stable than the Wieder claims from within the ethnomethodological perspective. Thus, while Wieder's approach may be laudably seen to attempt to incorporate 'a genuine humanism in an ideological sense', it can be asked '[w]hether this moral humanism is theoretically justified' (Alexander 1987: 280).
In his account of how the convict code is to be interpreted, Wieder emphasises how it obtains a indexical status. Rather like the coding system of books in a library, its norms serve to interpret rather than to describe it. Thus, norms serve as a tacit justification of real events, for both social actors and the sociologist. A truer account of events, is, however, more complicated. By accepting norms as motivation and authentic drives of social actors, the convict code came to serve as a tool of rendering behaviour logical and coherent. For staff, this tool justified an acceptance of nonconformist behaviour from the residents' side, while the residents often successfully manipulated it to their direct advantage. This underlying differentiation reveals the political and arbitrary nature of social norms, however developed and "theory-laden". In his approach to sociology, Wieder, and the wider school of ethnomethodologists, build upon the work of phenomenology and existentialism to show the inescapability of situational variables in the everyday context of social interaction. Thus, the "what" of social norms must separated from the "how" of interpretation, and subsequently analysed at a different level. This approach, however, has not remained uncriticised. Many sociologists deem the extent of manipulative power that ethnomethodologists award the individual with unrealistic. According to them, behaviour is more context-bound and can be seen to be derived from this context. In that case, Wieder's account of the convict code serves, foremostly, as an existential reminder of the forces underlying our everyday commonsense social interaction. .