When we talk about the 1930s in terms of social history, we often refer to the strong emergence of ideology into the public domain. Moreover, for Latin American countries, the first half of the twentieth century marked the coming of 'modernity'. Self-representation through culture was usually closest at hand for the lower classes, and often provided a colourful means of communicating a multi-faceted message. In this essay we shall look at such cultural representations in Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, and assess the extent to which they contributed to the construction of a national identity. Naturally, art forms such as dance and music were, even though powerful, not the only way of expressing one's national sentiments. The first films with sound managed to reach a mass audience and demonstrated what it was like to be a true Argentine, or Brazilian, in a light package. Moreover, the aftermath of key political events (Argentina, the 'infamous decade' after the fall of Yrigoyen; Brazil, the 1930 coup of Vargas; Mexico, the heritage of the revolution) and the subsequent split among the people brought a new literature of thinkers focussing with urgency upon 'national character and the metaphysics of the Mexican, Argentinian or Brazilian 'being''.
Argentina
An early elaboration upon Argentine culture and its forms can be found in Sarmiento's Sarmiento, Argentina's president between 1868 and 1874, regarded the countryside, inhabited by the mestizo gaucho Argentine, as uncivilized, chaotic - even barbarous: 'dirty children covered in rags, living amid packs of dogs; men stretched out on the ground, in utter inactivity; filth and poverty everywhere'.
The thirties in Argentina were marked by modernising development from above and from below. The tango started its ascending popularity from below. Its association with knife-fighting and gangs was famously put into words in Borges' short story 'Streetcorner Man' of 1933. In it, two gang leaders head into confrontation on an illegal tango party.
These aspects - machismo, violence, illegitimacy, made dancing the tango into a rebellious act, associated with characters on the edge of society, devoid of patriotic virtue or morality. Before this shift, the tango only gained marginal recognition as a truly Argentine metropolitan dance, as in the poem 'Milonga' by Oliverio Girondo.
A second exponent of tango, nevertheless, soon found through tango a new formula for political criticism, woven into poetical lyrics. The song 'Cambalache' by Enrique Santos Disc 'Those that don't cry don't feed', Santos sang, 'and those that don't steal are fools'.
Despite this loathing with politics, the middle class adopted the tango as an aspect of the new, dynamic and modern culture that Argentina was now adopting. In this, the cinema played a big, yet not unambiguous role. Argentina was steadily adopting the Northern American cinema culture. In 1930, around a thousand film screens could be found throughout the country. By the late thirties, fifty such films were produced a year, also serving as a charming and successful export product for other Latin American countries.
While the metropolitan immigrant gained commercial ground and mass appeal, other cultural forces were working from above, posing questions at a more political and intellectual level.  In the essay, Ezequiel Mart Jews, who were often particularly victim of racism, attempted, with relative success, to bring the issue to attention in the theatre. A number of Jewish playwrights wrote plays on Argentine Jewish families and their cultural problems, with strategies varying from the complete abandonment of any distinctive Jewish identity',
The literature of Jorge Luis Borges forms a totally separate category in Argentina's intellectual life of the thirties. Whilst his outlook towards nationalism was complicated and peculiar, both the political left and right came to agree 'that what the fictions display is mastery'. By the 1930s, however, Borges came to reject Mart Instead, he proposed that
This deconstructionist view of
The 1930s as a definable decade for Brazil started in October 1930, when a group of young army officers overthrew the long-standing S Gradually, art forms and cultural expressions of the lowest classes (in Brazil this mainly meant the former slaves) became accepted by a wider public, and eventually even representative as national symbols. The film genre of the Already in 1931, many of the writers in the Modernist movement were aware of the ideological clash that the Vargas government was driving the cultural community into.
While in the early decades of the twentieth century public concerts of Whereas previously lovers of Amidst the still prevalent racism in Brazil, Gilberto Freyes presented his theory of 'racial democracy' in 1933 with the publishing of his book In it, Freyes argued that the contribution of Afro Brazilians added to the rich cultural mix in which Brazilian tradition was embedded. However, now supported by the state, who saw in the lower classes an important element for the maintenance of the status quo, the Each room in her house had different musical genre performances, with in the front rooms -near to the street- respectable dances such as the polka, and toward the back Fusing African rhythms and European tonal scales into a more accessible style, the
Central to the These dancers performed the As the carnival was becoming bigger, it became also more organised. So-called
Whether empowering the black lower classes, or simply reducing their contribution to 'the picturesque and the folkloric', With the coming of sound in films, the most popular film genre became, as had been the case in Argentina, a light story incorporating popular songs. The Brazilian version of such films was the
Fundamental to the national culture of Brazil are the inhabitants of the favelas, who had an important history in Brazilian theatrical culture. The , as the mostly black-inhabited slums around Rio de Janeiro were called, can be seen as a powerful source of Brazilian nationhood. Disenchantment with traditional forms of entertainment, allied with a desire to increase the popularity of the state-oriented Samba School contests, made way for the ebullient parades of the nascent 'sambas enredo', thus replacing the street performances of the carnavalescos by school performances.  The development of samba music from a low-class solo hybrid to an ensemble, mass-appreciated music went by unnoticed by the government which initially, in the 1910s, outlawed samba. By the 1930s, however, politicians had already come to regard samba as a key part of Brazilian culture, linking poverty, lower-class heroes and and the need for a united national identity. With the regulating of the samba schools and the introduction of the 'samba enredo', Brazilian folklore came to represent a significant national banner. The musical talent samba was well accepted amongst both the working and middle class. The bourgeoisie embraced it while still emphasising classical music as the 'higher culture'. A work such as Heitor Villa-Lobos' Uirapuru of 1922 was a truly 'Brazilian' symphony. Through the combination of Brazilian folklore, Villa-Lobos creates
Traditional high culture in Brazil's thirties was preoccupied with another struggle, that against the right-wing dictatorship. Upper class painter Tarsila do Amaral, after having explored aspects in Brazilian nativism in her work, now started to focus on representing traditional every-day scenes of the countryside. Raquel de Queir In 1937 she was imprisoned for her radical Trotskyist political outlook. A less covered ideological viewpoint is provided in Patr Elements of nationalism are obviously subjugated for the purpose of class struggle, as in the following passage.
The way in which this passage points out any Brazilian national identity is clearly negative; it argues in favour of a 'simple', social Brazil instead of an internationally incorporated, capitalist nation. Elements of Brazilian grassroots national identity are ironically referred to as expressions of a repressed class:
Other poetry, although not as explicitly communist as Galv The liberal M
Brazilian literature and poetry of the modernist movement revealed thus revealed a highly politicised, polemic style, much embedded in the opposition of the dictatorship and united through this opposition rather than through a shared outlook of Brazilian nationalism proper. Throughout the thirties, Brazil remained still very much in search of a form of national cohesion.
In Mexico, the revolution proved to be the 'defining event', shaping the nation for the remainder of the century. In an attempt to create a "new man" and "new woman", the new government turned to art, popular culture and education to create a new sense of nationhood for the Mexicans. The art of the 1920s and 1930s is thus marked by a fresh interest in Aztec art and architecture, and a celebration of the 'Indian race' can be found in nationalistic essays.
By the thirties, a new political machine, the National Revolutionary Party, had been put in place and the work of myth-making of Mexican heroes of the revolution started. This period has been marked the post-revolutionary period, as legitimising the state, as well as instilling a paradoxical blend of conservative revolutionary sentiments in Mexicans.
To express and symbolise their newly won freedom and nationhood, popular culture started to play a bigger role. The traditional corrido, a ballad-like song style, turned into tales of revolution. Moreover, it integrated local elements like rural music forms, and had its origins in an illegal colonial tradition already. The ballad evolved further under the influence of the Americans into the corrido; a very popular, often longer, tale of heroes and villains, like the American western.
Another aspect of this They are transformed to be used on mass scale, into three-minute songs to be played on the radio Agust The following is an example of a corrido describing the death of Francisco Villa.
Yet another way in which the revolutionaries were eternalised and epitomised as heroes of the Mexican nation was through the paintings of Diego Rivera, Jose Orozco and David Alfaro Siqueiros. Supported and often commissioned by the government, these painters fulfilled 'the visual component of [the] need to create that Mexican citizen necessary for the survival of the post-Revolutionary state'.
In terms of literature, the 1930s saw a continuation of the style employed in the twenties. Epic works with 'the man on horseback', Where Guzm His novel
There were, of course, also many writers opposed to this mythical image. In fact, the Mexican revolution brought no generation of poets of any significance; most of them were to be sought with the defeated reactionaries. The following extract comes from a
Arguably, illiteracy rates stood in the way of effective nation-building through literature. Some have thus asserted that 'it [was] film, not writing, which create[d] [...] the 'imagined community' of the nation'. Thus when the Soviet filmmaker Eisenstein, visiting Mexico, planned to make a film on the history of Mexico, the government withdrew their subsidies for fear that such a film might cause an outrage amongst the oligarchic
In the aftermath of the revolutionary decade (1910-1920) in Mexico, the new authorities then energetically set about constructing the archetype of a new "ideal Mexican". This was based upon a renewed enthusiasm about the Indian, who was henceforth to be considered as a part of the new Mexican state.  Nationalism was hence instilled through popular means: mural painting, the By actively interfering and negotiating these art forms, the state sought to channel the multitude of opinions into a glorification of the new
Nationhood is a fluid concept. It can be manipulated to incorporate whatever ideological ideas, and exclude or obscure what one does not find appropriate to it. Argentina and Brazil in the 1930s saw the beginning of a great transformation of nationhood, while Mexico had already begun that project directly after the Mexican revolution. Although often the state attempted to control cultural representations of its nationalism, intellectuals and poorer minorities did not let this happen easily. Borges refused to accept a simple, patriotic nationalism, thereby brilliantly revealing the paradoxes underlying such a concept; in Vargas' Brazil, the government was in a constant state of war with its poets and authors on the left, while former slaves of the Perhaps the Mexican state can be said to have succeeded best at imposing an official picture of nationalism. Their Nevertheless, the successes in Mexico also knew their limits. The Catholic religion proved impossible to curb, while student protests in the 1970s already revealed the violent antagonism underlying the picture of Mexico that the government offered its people.
Representations of national identity, then, are inherently linked with political ideology and power. Brazilian authors with tendencies toward communism provide the example; they employ a highly politicised image of the 'true Brazilian' proletariat. In Argentina, such representations resulted in two opposing views, the gauchoesque patriot, modelled after When tango, the voice of the minorities, and Borges came into the equation, a mono-cultured Argentine ideal became more complicated and troublesome. Similar in each of the three countries discussed, however, are the influences of 'lower' cultural forms. Tango, initially despised by all respectable layers of society, became the epitome of In Mexico, the
Nationalism in all countries discussed, became increasingly represented in popular ways, reaching out to a mass audience. The constructors of such nationalistic forms sought to reach out to an unprecedented number of people, instilling upon them these new forms of nationalism. In Brazil, In Argentina it culminated in the decade of Peron's popular dictatorship. It can thus be said, that across these nations, the 1930s transformed nationalism into a popular and far-reaching construct.