The intention of this paper is move outward from new and old statistical empirical evidence, found on the one hand in the National Archives (PRO) and the RAF Museum Archive, and on the other, in existing secondary literature, and ask what this reveals about British air strategy in the 1920s and 1930s. The methodology used is to take researched evidence, portray it in the form of charts, data bases or spreadsheets, and then use this IT generated information as the foundation for discussion. The archive material was not examined with any pre-conceived conclusions in mind. It will be our job to use all the empirical meat to create an interpretable abstract of air strategy. We will question whether these sources either perpetuate or shed new light on existing discourse. Along the road the sources will be challenged for their usefulness as historical pieces of evidence.
The paper begins by examining a particular air strategy document produced by Air Staff, exemplified in Figure 1 below. It is the 'Proposal for Peace Strength of the RAF' - and is useful in revealing the early interpretation of air strategy in 1919.  The Figure is best at highlighting the developing dynamism of aerospace strategy, institutionalised around the implementation of air power into 'an hour glass of defence' The Air Staff emphasized that, should war break out, 'the importance of the defence of the ground forces by aircraft is known by all' in a traditionally traditional war; however 'this must reach its maximum efficiency in a more mobile kind of warfare' This recognition of the offensive capabilities of air power is endurable by the Figure, which reveals that at peace time the RAF should consist of, not only Home Defence and Overseas squadrons, but also involve some 32 training squadrons with a huge complement of reserves. This strategical portfolio demonstrates what a radical break point had been reached in 1919, with the Air Staff finally starting to think logically in terms of offensive operations, instead of solely air control. It is also important to note that the RAF was to employ what Air Staff termed 'strategic offensive bombing,' aiming to 'render great cities uninhabitable' This point confronts pre-existing literature on air policy in the 1920s, which holds that strategic bombing was not seriously taken up until later.
The Figure is extremely useful in that it provides a snapshot of the air strength the Air Ministry hoped for in its 1920s conception of air strength. On the face of it, the proposal of 68 squadrons in home defence, plus 51 for imperial defence - as proposed in the March estimate - appears to demonstrate the Air Ministry idealism for creating a credible air arm, stretching to all corners of the Empire. However, this desire was clearly strained within a backdrop of economic retrenchment. These 68 squadrons far exceed the 55 suggested earlier by the Committee of Imperial Defence, hinting at officer pressure for a larger force; this is further evidenced by the Chief of the Air Staff's terse remark 'we wish to turn our swords into ploughshares, but not so fast'. It bears remembers that it was the need to create sufficient 'shock effect' and the RAF's mission to be flexible to meet imperial needs simultaneously, which propelled the Air Ministry to make such proposals. Within such a framework, the Officer's scheme appears to prioritise imperial over home defence numbers - with the latter coming off better in the end -in disagreeance with contemporary historians, who often argue that the home defence was the undoubted priority in 1920s British air strategy. V Admittedly, it nevertheless remains debatable to what extent the Air Ministry would have been able to find resources and personnel for these grand schemes. We have no evidence to suggest how many of the proposed squadrons were operational or to what profile they operated. And indeed, the proposed air strength may well have been seen as a best -case scenario, designed to secure a better financial settlement. Above all, the Figure is perhaps most revealing, not just of the proposed air strength, but in its implication of the Air Ministry outlook in the early 1920s.
Overall, the Figure is an idealist snapshot that ultimately is best at revealing Air Staff pressure on air strategy, captured in a accompanying remark by the Chief - 'we wish to turn our swords into ploughshare... but not so fast'
Since this paper is interactive in type, and wishes to contrast old and new source material, we will start by examining post-war air strategy during the tenure of the Chief of the Air Staff, Lord Trenchard. The economic backlash to the war had radically curtailed the Royal Flying Corps' ambition to become a fully stream-lined competitive fighting force. We therefore wished to examine service expenditure since the Great War to gain an appreciation of the financial impediments that Trenchard encountered. This data was taken from a 1921 Air Ministry Memorandum (Appendix 1, reproduced in Figure 3 below).
It is clear that the earlier optimism of the Air Staff proved ephemeral, as air service expenditure initially sharply fell, and then remained relatively austere. The Figure supports existing discourse about air strategy, which contends that the RAF just about 'held on' during its cradle days, in the face of ferocious economic retrenchment, the Ten-Year Rule and a zetheist that condemned recourse to conflict. The impact of the imposed permanent war planning blight, is particularly evident if we note the acute fall in Technical and Warlike Stores estimates in the Appendix - elements that constitute the kernel of aggressive air strength - from It is also significant to note from that source that research was particularly barren throughout the period, falling from This goes a long way in explaining the poor quality of aircraft the RAF possessed as late as 1934, still consisting of inchoate wooden biplanes. The data also reveal that air strategy was far from a blueprinted plan, and was in fact often pragmatic and respondent to changes in geopolitik. For example, the slight rise in expenditure in 1924 can be seen as a direct response to the perceived threat of the Arm However, the data has limitations that prevent a challenge to the existing historiography. They give no indication of how many planes were actually produced or what important fields of operation fared better than others. How far was the empire really given wings as the Chief of the Air Staff had proposed in 1918? They also do not offer any information on the Army and Navy, against which to draw priority comparisons; and industrial capacity is unknown.
Moving on to the period between 1924 and 1929, Figure 4 shows that air service expenditure increased only slightly, rising from This supports existing literature which holds that despite the increased international turbulence of the era: Primoreski, Manchurian Incursion, the rise of Nazi Germany and Mussolini's brazen saber rattling - Britain still chose to financially hibernate. The source further reveals a continuation of the austerity measures of the 1920s, and a continuation of the unwritten ten year rule which deemed war unlikely within the time period. Here air strategy is best viewed as stemming from a 'try hard' effort to do as much as possible with the limited number of resources available.
It is evident that in 1934, expenditure on air services were still at This period of relative solvency was short lived. The financial outlook was soon to be darkened by the coming of the 'bald' year of 1935 and the further austerity a To understand the context of Britain's comparative air strength during the period, we will compare our data with French and German estimates in Table 1 below. It thus appears that Britain still held pre-eminence in relative air strength, a fact that conveniently ignored all the deficiencies within it. Nonetheless, British standing had fallen since 1932, most noticeably in the ratio of proportion of total expenditure devoted to the air services in 1  German force has increased drastically from However, are these figures actually telling us anything of real tactical value to air strategy? Do they explain why one force was better than the other? Should policy makers have used them at all? These points can only be settled by further detailed scrutiny of other evidence. Nevertheless, the Table provides a basis in assessing the comparative air strength situation in Europe, a fact upon which it is possible to build sensible conclusions; though we must recognise that caveats must be taken with such figures.
Nevertheless, the data illustrates the largely immovable nature of air strategy in this period and reveals the profound limitation of air strength in the mid 1930s. Not only had this remained relatively stable since 1930, but was still lagging as a strategic tool with regard to its civil and naval counterparts. This source therefore confirms the existing discourse on the temporal banality of RAF strategy in the 1930s.
We can move our discussion from the late 1930s by seeking to discover what happened then. Again, Appendix 2, shown in Figure 6 below, has much to contribute. The Figure indicates that from 1935, air service expenditure rocketed. This immediate spurt in spending, however, must be seen in light of the preceding two years' budgets, as well as the larger historic developments of the decade. Only with this can we gain a fair assessment of the data. The Figure supports existing discourse, which claims that air strategy, between 1933 and 1939, was characterised by a reluctance to face the future 'The country was fighting against something, but it had not yet found what' We can now pinpoint an end to this visual demurring in the Figure, which shows upwards spending trajectories from 1935 onwards - a robust effort to rouse Britain from her economic torpor and supposed unpreparedness for war. From 1935 to 1938 a 188 per cent rise in air expenditure can be seen. This presumably illustrates the government's endeavour to find that elusive 'something', that England was missing. The Figure, however, fails to explain why this occurred.
This gives us two interpretations. Firstly this supports the existing discourse in which Britain awoke from its 'noisy slumbers' when she became conscious of Germany's perceived aggressive attitude and increasing military strength. Secondly, the patterns suggest that the Air Ministry was raising the bar on air strength to a more optimum offence posture - the number of bombers delivered between 1930 and 1934 had increased steadily.
The various air schemes (Appendix 3) developed and amended from 1933 onwards, outlining the types and numbers of planes required for the front line by a certain date, provide the key to unlocking the deeper roots associated with air policy in this period. Figure 7 below, produced from this Appendix, shows that the Britain was increasingly dedicating her resources to bombers.
Simply this demonstrates a strategic move from parity bombers to strategic bombers. The source supports what we know, that policy-makers attempted to increase bomber strength and impose deterring parity with Germany, so 'by 1938 Bomber Command had achieved strategic balance with the Luftwaffe'. The continued emphasis of bombers runs in tandem with existing historiographical understanding, which postulates that this period saw the growing belief that bombers could achieve political objectives largely through the production of fear and intimidation, leading to 'blitz diplomacy', or the deliberate targeting of civilian populations and armament factories. It also obliquely suggests that policymakers neither had faith in the capability of fighters to turn the tide of future wars, nor the economic capacity to mass produce them in any great volume.
We can compare these aircraft requirements with the numbers delivered in the late 30s, found in Appendix 4 and this Figure 8 below.
on the production of airframes between August 1938 and November 1939.
It is clear that, from January 1939, airframe manufacturers started to exceed their production promises. These promises would have been established with policymakers in the deterrence by parity years. Although not explicit in the chart, we can draw three possible conclusions from this. The surpassing of airframe guarantees can almost incontestably be seen as the final nail in the coffin for the parity strategy, as the government encouraged air manufacturers to move towards a war footing. Not only had hopes of an air convention been lost but also the promises of Munich seemed long forgotten. Britannia's trident was now a bayonet and her shield a gas mask. Less probably, it could reflect that manufacturers had simply become more efficient in their production, no longer cruising at barely economical speed. More sinisterly, the data could suggest production profiteering, as captured in the illustration below (albeit in 1935).
Ultimately, however, the source is best at confirming the end of air parity, than it is at hinting at more polemical speculations.
Moving on to the 1930s, we shall now look at the sources discussing the development of what was the most important asset of British air strategy, the fighter. Paraphrasing the Second World War Controller of Aircraft Production in 1931, 'we had too few of the right fighters and too many of the wrong', referring to the dominance of the slow, wooden, biplane in an age where the monoplane fighter ruled. We can trace the development of fighter production by turning to Figure 9 below. The chart details, as accurately as is possible with existing evidence, the aircraft schemes of 1933 and 1937, showing that there was a growing interest in the modern fighter, expressed by an increase in fighter production from 454 in 1933 to 6730 by 1937. However, being limited to the production figures of the aircraft schemes of 1933 and 1937 does not present a fully accurate picture of change and trend in fighter production, as it summarily ignores developments in between the schemes, such as the abortive Air Fighting Strength Scheme of 1936. Ironically, a valid picture of fighter production could be attained simply by understanding the fact that in 1936 the Air Staff attempted to boost fighter production with this failed scheme. It is essential that we use all the available evidence collectively. By following such a maxim, we can check the original source on the production of cars in 1938 (Figure 8), and now place a bias in the research towards fighters. Appendix 4 contains the exact figures of fighter delivery from June 1938 to May 1939. For the purposes of this paper, and in order to maintain simplicity, we will focus on Spitfire deliveries from this source (Figure 10), as they possessed a higher operational value than their Hurricane counterpart.
It is quite apparent that a significant rise in production occurred from October 1938 onwards. However, this source is fundamentally limited in understanding air strategy, as Spitfires were neither the archetypal fighter in 1938-9 nor accounted for the bulk of the fighter force. Hurricane production is also required, in order to obtain a true picture of any significant change in production, and ergo air strategy. The difference in orders was 8647 more Hurricanes (Appendix 4). Importantly, Figure 10 below shows that from June 1938 the number of all fighters being delivered rose feverishly.
The data indisputably reveals that changes in aircraft production played an instrumental principle in Britain's policy. The Fighter Scheme of the later 1930s was an attempt to equate the supply of airframes to the demand of the service and other factors, such as procurement capability, and had 'become a science in itself'. The source confirms that fighter production rose, a certain feeing of belligerency is evoked, as the RAF was fast trying to increase the size of its force to a size that would not only combat a potential German attack, but also reduce the number of British casualties. In this sense, the increased production represented a memorialisation of the knock out blow fear, as Britain sought the
opportunity to rush an increased number of fighters In the air. Our data confirms this.
It is immediately apparent that only a small shift away from bombers towards fighters occurred. This is by no means supportive of existing discourse. Literature on 1930's air power recognises the shift but argues that it was much more pronounced, with production geared three to one in favour of fighters. However, Figure 11 indicates that, in receiving well over 40 per cent of total aircraft production, the bomber remained the main player in air strategy, notwithstanding a greater emphasis to fighters. Thus, the pie charts provide an empirically tested challenge to the current epistemological understanding of the period.
The final part of this paper will question the common usage by contemporary historians of simple comparative air power strength charts, as exemplified by Figure 12 below.
This chart reveals that Germany was far ahead of Britain in terms of aircraft production until 1937. This source has a fundamental limitation in both understanding air strategy and competing with other forms of warfare. To begin with, the chart is retrospective, which presents the danger of having a clear impression of inevitable future war, when in reality, much was uncertain even as late as 1938. Secondly, the chart, in its focus on total numbers, neglects such areas of alliance diplomacy, the quality of air- crews and the extent of industrialisation, each significantly affecting the external environment of air strategy. Thirdly, the chart is one dimensional, it does not take into account the relative contribution of any one particular aircraft type, or
more than front line types (for example, Germany devoted far larger amounts of production than Britain to trainers), and they give us no insight into how many of the aircraft delivered were immediately deployable, through pilot availability and other factors. Also ignored in assessing proportional difference in air strength is the contribution of anti-aircraft defences. The contemporary historian, therefore, needs to take these sensitivities in his metaphorical knapsack when he enters the archives.
CONCLUSION
Although ultimately recognising, as Clifford Geertz laments 'what we call our data are really our own constructions of other people's constructions' Indeed, there remains a vast sum of non-researched information relating to air strategy in the 1920s and 1930s waiting for the historian in the archives. Arguably, what our fighter discovery shows above all is that literature on air strategy in the 1920s and 1930s has itself become a too entrenched 'matter of faith'. It is thus the job of the air historian to revise further the subject, particularly the years 1938 to 1939, in greater detail.