For too long the history of the Cold War has been written from a 'top-down' perspective examining elites and decision-makers. Whilst political scientists have become mired in using rational International Relations models, historians have rarely cast their net beyond realpolitik, frequently falling foul of detailed narrative around contingencies which often never occurred. The fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and the end of the 30-year rule for many documents in the West, which both led to a spate of archival-based sources available to historians, cemented this diplomatic and empirical approach. Moreover, archival work alone is a dangerous place from which to survey the Cold War, since both sides of the Iron Curtain employed 'newspeak' rather than rational discourse, even behind closed doors. In short, this 'New Cold War history' can become overly narrative driven and blind to broader analysis. However, as a result of the growing interest in cultural history following the 1980s 'linguistic turn', recent study, particularly in the so called 'Constructivist' school, has challenged Cold War historians to spread their wings methodologically, and explore the culture of the conflict. In spite of noteworthy 'hot' episodes, such as Vietnam, the Cold War was in most part a conflict of words and images delivered to an audience soaked in its products.
One unmined area of Cold War culture is Hollywood Bomb Cinema. Bomb Cinema denotes films where the nuclear bomb is an explicit part of the theme or narrative and includes a body of films, widely forgotten, from classics such as Working under Freud's avowal that a cigar is sometimes only a cigar, their inquiry is devoid of any attempt to unearth hidden realities. Apocryphal moments are not examined for anything more than meaningless and pleasurable fantasy. For example, in reviewing C. Scott'.
Cinema is the most recent area of investigation for historians of the Cold War. In this area, however, scholarship has been limited by a lack of focus on filmic intertextuality, and an inability to draw together narrative threads in a coherent way. Films from the 1940s and 1950s have often been ‘forgotten’ or disregarded as mindless escapist entertainments. Moreover, While it is unconventional to view Hollywood’s ‘bombs and rockets’ films as political reflections, to ignore the latent socio-political contexts of the film is to discard an essential facet of the historical scholar’s quest to ‘know’ the past. Indeed, examining Hollywood’s ‘Bomb Films’ provides an insight into the era’s discourse on the prospect of imminent nuclear disaster, the effect of the bomb on man, the proliferation of the bomb and the role of scientists in the advancement of weaponry, all of which are important elements of what might be called the ‘world’ of the Atomic Age. Furthermore, ‘The Bomb’ was not only an agent of death and destruction, but also a symbol of populist intertext, the Cold War’s equivalent to a biblical quotation or a speech from Hamlet. Epigrammatic phrases, such as ‘duck and cover’ and ‘mutually assured destruction’, are used to anchor the political culture of the Atomic Age into memorable moments of easy access.  Given the heavy-handed influence of the US State Department and the Cold War ideology ruling mainstream American culture, we find films of the period which were relatively apolitical, focusing upon technology and wholly ignoring the democratic implications of the bomb. For this paper, such films are termed 'straight'. Most reviewers, however, have tended to ignore any of the subversive messages these films contain, frequently making them vehicles for the celebration of an uncritical sense of Cold War 'Progressivism’. While ideology during the period did denote progressive values and a push for the freedom of expression, this was by no means a simultaneously held belief. What we call here subversive Bomb Cinema includes films where the US propaganda model is turned on its head, making it a target of attack and critique.   The issues discussed here are: Nuclear proliferation, Organisation Man, Scientists and Technology; all of which are represented, in part, within Bomb Cinema. Despite the dominance of US state-sponsored ‘straight’ films, the popularity of nuclear movies in the late 1940s and early 1950s provided a space for critiquing to enter the pop culture vernacular. Moreover, the ‘curtain of censorship’, rather than merely suppressing oppositional voices, also ensures the conflicting messages remain locked in the melodramatic text, and thus, as Melissa Mer + fect of Cold War propaganda.  This paper’s main concern
Night of the Living Dead (1968) is arguably amongst the most influential films in popular culture. Following its release in October 1968 it quickly took cult status, with its title frequently making it to the headlines of influential newspapers and magazines. Despite over five decades the zombie craze within pop culture not only still shows no evidence of abating but continues to permeate various other mediums of art. George Romero's classic has been the catalyst for all things zombie-related in contemporary society, triggering a continual fascination with shuffling corpses. The accompanying poster, depicting a zombie hand reaching through the foreground, quickly becoming a recognisable reference to the b-movie classic itself. Nevertheless, the film has, for the most part, been neglected in academic studies. Whilst it is acknowledged as an urban horror classic, it has been subject to very little noteworthy and informed critical analysis. From a historical perspective it is often concluded that the film was an allegory for racism and the Cold War. Whilst these theories are tempting and indeed offer some level insight into the film's narrative, I will instead argue that only by understanding the film's various metafictional references can we determine a definitive stance upon whatNight of the Living Dead offered to contemporary audiences.  Rather quickly apparent is the implicit criticism that the Night of the Living Deadserved to depict on the conventions of the horror genre itself. In setting the events of the film at a cemetery, George Romero takes his audience back to the genre's roots; for it was here that horror fiction began. Consequently, by insidiously implying the genre's evolutionary progress to the 1950s explosion of science fiction and the atomic age, users are pointedly reminded of how this once-grounded genre has since become terrified of its own limitations.  In opening and closing the film with the cemetery, and setting the majority of the scenes in a rural farmhouse, Romero implies a certain inclination back to the settings of classic horror films. What's more, this modern-classicism is further compounded by the film's reliance upon a range of thematic allusions; harking back to narratives of vampirism. For example, invoking the fear of cannibalism as well as the apprehension of the undead; it seems as if the picture wishes to romanticise this classic style of horror, whilst still conveying ideas which are pertinent to society's current climate.  Character
The 1950s represented a unique decade in the post war world, a decade which saw the birth of a range of film genres hitherto unseen. The development of the bomb and the nuclear arms race saw the emergence of 'Bomb Cinema', which flourished in the shadow of the Cold War. Atomic anxieties were not confined to espionage dramas or missile crisis films but featured in Science Fiction genres ranging from creature features to alien invasion thrillers and Nuclear Romances.  I argue that Bomb Cinema during this period seriously subverted the official Cold War propaganda line by presenting differing visions of the atomic age. Working under the constant eye of the HUAC, the distinctively science fiction wing of bomb cinema used covert images to depict anxieties that accompanied life with the bomb. Recent findings also support Kubrick's observation on the instability of the arms race. We now know that military had developed the 'Single Integrated Operation Plan', which worked on the assumption that America would be willing to be the first to use nuclear weapons.
Pixar's 2004 film The film opens with a large black-and-white advert for the air force, where enthusiastic pilots are shown storing their B-52 bombers, with the task of protecting the US 'even in the darkest hour'. Images of Chuck Yeager breaking the sound barrier recur throughout, as the 'empire of the air' is extolled as the epitome of modern day society.  The only queer dynamics are the characters themselves, crippled by their loneliness. These 'lone warriors' are stuck in the role of jester-guardians, imaging a world they can never inhabit, where expensive toys, an airplane graveyard and silly songs recreate a fantasy world of hopes, dreams and nightmarish memories.  Unlike The film openly opposes the Bomb and implicitly rejects MAD, the prevalent US policy of the time, when it shows the enduring insignificance of the individual in the face of a larger agency. As night-vision shots of deserted air forces bases are projected onto the screen alongside the similarly empty homes of the protagonists, the message is subtle and yet clear. The bomb is the ultimate imbecilic expression of man's capacity to experiment upon himself, leaving only a desolate husk of humanity in its wake.        Robots of The film demands an end to the arms race and a new respect for the moral imperatives of peace. Although the film is 'overly moralistic, anachronistic and baldly didactic', it provides a fascinating insight into Eisenhower's Cold War era. American nuclear policy is likened to a game of chicken, where ultimately 'we invent a reason to go on', and in so doing fail to realise the sheer dominance of the Bomb over both the state and the individual.  Overall, protagonists of Atom bomb cinema are often portrayed as socially isolated trapped within a world of death, mental instability, violence and desolate militarism. Particularly in the post-war era, the Bomb was pushed as the ultimate symbol of war by Governments on both sides
The film's eerie predictions of a world left in nuclear darkness are drawn out by the technology of the new man. Atomic powered automobiles promise perpetual motion, as well as a diabolically 'clean industry', while the atomic weapons plant is a benign family affair with the General smiling sweetly as his daughter turns the key. Even the imagined energy, as a panacea for world peace, was an issue of the day. At a 1957 World Peace Conference, the Soviet Union famously proposed the immediate outlawing of nuclear energy, as a 'Great Step Toward Peace'.  The flip side of the promotional campaign, however, revolved around the proposition to 'get into the basement, and stay there'. Subversive bomb films, however, rejected the idea that the bomb was a mere civil defence problem. Lead by the genre of SF,  The effects of nuclear testing.. Radiation was a popular ominous image, even if hardly a central one. In The second is the hag-like Mrs Parsons who inhales the carcass of the spider -laced with isotopes - mutating her into a giant preying mantis. The third is Susan, who pleads with a troop of soldier ants to 'go back into the dark and be free', and returns mutated, with her limbs 'disintegrated'. The ants, however, are a metaphor for our lackovercraft  of control over the bomb. The scientist has created a 'mechanical mutation' and the ants will 'devour everything in their path until there's nothing left'. By introducing a number of Alice-esque themes,
Through this paper it is argued that Bomb Cinema exhibited a continual message on proliferation, as well as acting as a vehicle for critiques of the assimilation of the organization man into corporate culture, science and technology, and the culpability of leadership during the Age of the Bomb. Furthermore, the variability of films indicate that these messages were dispersed to a variety of audiences. The first of these issues is nuclear proliferation.  The tension arises from the threat of nuclear conflict, with both sides posturing, as General Savage suggests, 'as if we had a date with destiny'. However, as Paul Rothemund This point is further emphasised when Turgidson reveals the Doomsday Machine to be 'the ultimate decision-maker' and 'the one's in the pentagon play Russian roulette with the whole world'. Beyond this rhetoric, D.M.
The black comedy ending of For Kubrick, the logical result of Soviets 'lofting satellites as easily as Americans dunked baskets' and bomb shelters proliferating like greenhouses, was nuclear Armageddon. Cynically rejecting the safeguards projected in When General Turgidson argues for 'catching them with their pants down', in a pre-emptive first strike, Turgidson's insane proposal is no different from the calls by Air Force chief General Curtis LeMay to give them 'Sunday punch'. Recent findings support Kubrick's observation on the instability of the arms race. We now know that the military had developed the 'Single Integrated Operations Plan', which worked on the assumption that America would have been willing to be the first to use nuclear weapons.
In reply, General Turgidson asks 'wasn't it Mark Twain who said... that a thousand years from now this world would be a total obliteration'? The audience is left to appreciate that Twain's point has come to pass even sooner than anticipated, as the Great War has already arrived, courtesy of modern science and man's thirst for power. The irrationality of man's ambition can be seen in It is 'the mother of all bombs', capable of being triggered remotely by a combination of three numbers which must be kept secret from each other at all times. Of course, the moral problems of this singular instrument are obvious; just as the alien ship was invulnerable to attack, so is the doomsday machine, succinctly expressed by Mandrake's question, 'How can one possibly threaten the other side with it? It's like welcoming total destruction'. It argues that whilst science has made many advances, there is an increase in human vulnerability rather than security, thus presenting the bomb as the equator of modern life. It is a disastrous human invention that will effect both sides, thus having no possible martial justification
At the time of the film's release, the Alert America campaign ran within the context of Cold War culture. From Dick's initial 'stand by for a visual display bound to send a thrill up all backbones' to the patriotic beach holidays, the film offers a resounding call to patriotic duty. Citing 'battleships and B-52s', the state's military and technological prowess is aggrandized and indeed, it is the military's stubborn and blinkered insistence on superiority that leads to Ripper's attack on the Soviet Union. Despite this, Austin asserts it is 'not a war movie' as There is no doubt that the President's plan to freeze all military action until the 'Russians can be contacted and absolutely certain that this is not just a bluff' is a patently unworkable solution. He suggests pursuing a course of moral negotiations with the Soviet powers. Austin thus argues that the Cold War could be won through strategies of peace and negotiation, rather than adherence to a policy, which propagated progressive destruction. Even the ultimate destruction of the Soviet coal mine is but another display of Cold War hubris and technological superiority.
However, most subversive bomb cinema showed that the growing regimentation of corporate culture made man bereft of any genuine individual identity and sense of accomplishment. The most pertinent statement in Living in suburbia, 'the dormitory of the new generation of organization men', and working as a reluctant organization man in his brother's firm, Robert Carey finds little achievement in his life. In his ritual killing of the spider, Carey loses his fear of alienation from the group, experiencing a psychological transformation. In revealing, 'and then I meant something too... To God there is no zero', Carey asks the audience to embrace his liberation. In addition, the film shows that the famous sentence in the Communist Manifesto stating that the proletariat has nothing to lose but its chains has little relevance for the organization man. Robert Carey has something to lose conjecturally - his standard of living. Carey represents a wider metonym for contemporary American middle-class families who, having run up large debts, became trapped in the net of the bourgeois milieu.
Asserting 'I'm not working for the world. I'm working for the Air Force', Hendry begins as the archetypal wheel-in-machine conformist, who cannot blow his nose without clearing it first with Headquarters. For example, using standard procedure to free an alien ship, Hendry accidentally blows it up. Hendry is actually immobilised by bureaucracy, stating 'until I receive my instructions from my superior officers, we'll have to mark time'. However, as we have shown, SF films were anything but unanimous in agreement.  It argues that society should embrace the organization man culture and posits that to leave the group is to be beyond the safe parameters of society. All the victims succumb when they leave the confines of the group. Furthermore, it takes a consortium of scientists, police and soldiers to defeat the ants.
The technical horrors described in most films can be seen as the ominous consequences of science. By unpacking the imagery of bomb films, historians can understand the complex nature of science and politics. In arguing this point, we do not deny the notion of total science control but instead recognise that whilst science played a potentially revolutionary role, it just as easily could lead to disaster. Understandably, a parallel became drawn between scientists and Dr. Frankenstein, considering their seemingly insequentual relationship to nature. Ironically, scientific success only became identified with military might; the poster child being Robert Oppenheimer, the founding father of the atomic bomb. 'The
Scientists, however, were both reviled and revered. In In contrast to Carrington, Dr Medford, in
Tom Ferrell believed that the rise of the 'unfettered society' had witnessed the decline of the individual. 'Instead of great events and illustrious careers',  For example, the victim and witness of Klaatu's power -
During his terms in office, Eisenhower did more than any previous President to integrate science into the state. Yet, in his farewell address he exhibited more than a powerful note of irony, warning that 'we must be alert to the...danger that policy could become the captive of a scientific-technological elite'. As the premier authority on the Doomsday Machine, Dr Strangelove - struggling with his 'Heil-Hitler' hand and speaking in a terse German accent, which denotes his Nazi affiliations - is devoid of love for anything except the bomb. Despite his mental deterioration, the leadership cede all power to him by the end, as they are completely distracted by his plans to continue the human race. Dr Strangelove can be seen as a parody of the Hydrogen Bomb scientist Dr Edward Teller. Repudiated by many of his scientific colleagues for testifying against Robert Oppenheimer, who called for nuclear restraint and internationalism, Teller ran with a more military crowd, becoming the darling of conservative thinkers for his advocacy of American scientific supremacy.
The final area of this paper addresses a theme unique to the films of subversion. All subversive films involve some measure of destruction and they question how this is allowed to happen. On Judgement Day who, or what, is at fault; the nature of man and his failings to control events or unrestrained technology growth? Witnessing no destruction, The characters exhibit no militant anticommunist hysteria, preferring not even to name the enemy, and simply refer to him as 'the other fella'.
This supports Stanley Kauffman's argument that 'ban the bomb and they'll find another way. The real Doomsday machine is men'. Unable to attain an audience with the world's leaders, given the bipolar tensions of the time, Klaatu complains to the President, 'I'm not concerned...with the internal affairs of your planet...my people have learned to live without [such stupidity]'. The President responds 'I'm afraid my people haven't'. One man calls him 'a wild animal'. Learning that the alien spacecraft is nuclear, Bobby exposes man's ignorance by stating 'I thought that was only for bombs'.
Of all of the bomb films from 1950-64, It documents the effects of the bomb on a typical American family, complete with a beginning, middle and end, and an identifiable common man hero, the preacher, Dr Jimmy Paustin. Using only a few weeks, the screenplay power to change society, from that of ignorance and paralysis to a more cooperative, active group of people.   Documenting a pre-dawn America, where even the churches are deserted, The Before the bomb is experienced, Lorraine views a government film on the results of the blast that she is told is produced by the same people who teach her in school. When the authorities refuse to yield the survivors of the explosion a bus to take them away, the resilient preacher offers his cogent view of liberty - 'Uncle Sam tells me I got to be free, but he won't give me a haircut'. Second, the setting of the bomb in a everyday 'town' and the 'everyman' Reverend Pauson humanises the cataclysmic event. Even though Johnny's diner - the local burger bar - and Ernie's pool hall are familiar, so too is the Reverend Pauson, with his wife and daughter. Graphically, in a truly shocking scene, Pauson's daughter becomes the living representation of the horrors of the effect of the atomic bomb and its power to generically splice man and beast.  Finally, The ending further serves to personalise the atomic bomb and its parallels with ordinary life. The preacher's ultimate
Lords of the bomb
These themes, depicting powerlessness, along with the pervasive images of hopelessness and fear, as well as the macabre spectres of death and destruction, as is plain to see, meant that subversive bomb films never fared well at the box office. Effectively buried by the Hays Office and censorship, these films were never meant to be granted a long life. As Robert Rosenstone has noted 'the utility of history and film can never be judged merely by their power to evoke an imagined past'. Filmmakers have a responsibility to make credible films that provoke audience engagement and understanding. Although more limited in the potential for social relevance, these films remain pertinent today. For example, commenting on American hubris, Cord Scott in The film, in presenting war as a video game with its attendant desensitisation to destruction, emanates a resolve that is, sadly, as valid today as it was in 1964.
The study of Bomb Cinema can tell us much about the culture of the Cold War. As the foregoing has suggested, these films did not shy from their critical evaluations of the US approach to the Cold War. Released in 1967, at the apex of the Cold War, and during the wider countercultural questioning of the Vietnam War, The Directors, particularly Kubrick, used these films to caricature the military-technical elite and thumb their nose at the military-industrial complex, which dominated the American approach to the Cold War. However, there was more to them than rebelliousness. As a consequence of the unequal distribution of power in the Cold War, Bomb Cinema also made a telling point on the apparent helplessness of the individual.
Yet, the importance of Arguably Gramsci argued that culture is a non-coercive means whereby the ruling-classes maintain their dominance by securing the consent of subordinate groups. Moreover, hegemony operates by allowing Thus, it is not surprising that we find in certain 1950s SF bomb films moments of divergence from the dominant paradigm. Here is concession at work. What It also signifies the decisive moment when audiences are no longer able to watch the nuclear subject straight. Kubrick originally had intended a straight adaptation of Peter George's novel Released shortly after