The aims of the experiment are to determine the HA (haemagglutinin) titre of a virus stock, to identify that virus on the basis of reactivity with known antisera and to determine the HI (Haemagglutination inhibition) titre of the specifically reactive serum by the combination of the HA and HI assays. Using haemagglutination property of certain viruses and end point dilution, the concentration or dilution of virus required to give the last positive haemagglutination, or the end point dilution was determined. This end point dilution gives the HA titre of the virus, which was 6400 HA units/ml and there was 2.88 x 10 Using this HA titre of the virus, a stock of diluted virus containing approximately 160 HA units/ml was prepared. As antibodies are specific, this precise haemagglutination prevention was used to identify the virus present. Similar to HA titre determination, the concentration or dilution of antibody required to just prevent haemagglutination was determined. This is known haemagglutination inhibition (HI) titre and from this, the HI titre of antiserum was 3200 HI units/ml. The virus was given was identified as influenza A virus.
Haemagglutination is an agglutination of red blood cells (RBC) or particles due to binding of viruses, bacteria and other cell types to specific receptors. Haemagglutination is also used as a means to identify and quantify the number of virus particles in a solution or to determine the quantity of specific antibodies present in a serum. In this experiment, haemagglutination was used to determine the HA titre and HI titre. The HA titre is the amount of virus required to cause haemagglutination and the HI titre is the amount of antibody present to just prevent haemagglutination.
The specificity of haemagglutination lies in the interaction between the virus and the host cell's surface. The virus binds to receptors on the host cell and as these receptors or domains differ in shape and complexity, a type of virus can only interact with certain host cells. This brought about this precise interaction. There are two main domains: a complex polypeptide motif or a simpler carbohydrate motif. In haemagglutination, it is due to binding to a carbohydrate motif.
The experiment was performed using the laboratory manual provided.
The experiment was conducted using the standard method of haemagglutination. First, the dilution of the virus was done according to the standard method and each dilution mixed with 2% (v/v) of a 2% suspension of guinea pig red blood cells (RBCs). The undiluted virus stock was added to the first 2% RBCs and each subsequent well was 1/2 (2-fold) dilutions of the previous well. This was done to find the end point of the virus, which was a dilution at which there was only a slight agglutination. This was repeating twice and read after one minute. The dilution at which there was a slight agglutination was taken as 1 HA unit and the titre of HA was determined.  The HI titre was done in similar manner. The virus was diluted to produce a virus suspension containing approximately 160 HA units/ml. This solution was mixed with 50 The first control (C1) contained 100 The second control (C2) contained 100 The third control (C3) contained 100 To the last control (C4), only 100 All the X and Y wells contain 100 The HI titre was also determined similarly. All the X and Y wells were mixed with 2% suspension of guinea pig RBCs and read after one minute. The concentration at which there was no HA inhibition was taken as 1 HI unit and the HI titre of the antiserum was determined.  Results
In the determination of the HA titre, 2 In each of the X wells, 25 The first X row was a 10 fold dilution and the second X row was a 20 fold dilution and therefore the sixth X row was a 320 fold dilution. Refer to the appendix for calculations.
From table 1, the 7 The first well is a 10-fold dilution, and the second well is a 20-fold dilution and the third well is a 40-fold dilution, therefore the seventh well is a 640-fold dilution of the original virus stock. Refer to the appendix for calculations. From table 2, the 6 As the 6 Refer to the appendix for calculations and the method for the contents of each well. As antibody Y did not inhibit agglutination of RBC, it is not the antibody for the virus provided. Therefore the virus was concluded as influenza A virus as it was known that antibody X contains the antiserum for influenza A virus. The amount of virus just able to agglutinate a fixed number of RBCs is defined as 1HA of virus and at the end points (refer to table 1 and 2), there is a virus concentration of 1 HA units/ml. The end points were clearly observed in table 1 (7 If there were too many virus present, agglutination would take place and the whole well would be almost homogenously red. If too little or no virus were present, the RBCs will settle to the bottom of the well resulting in a bright pink/red spot at the bottom of the well. If little or no antibody is present, it will behave the same as the presence of numerous viruses and a homogenous red well would be observed. In the HA assay, the 7 This is shown in well 7 of table 1. From this, the original stock was calculated to contain 6400 HA units of virus/ml and therefore had 2.88 x 10 In the HI assay, the 6 This is shown in well 6 of X rows of table 2. Since antibody Y did not prevent the agglutination of RBCs, the virus was concluded as not being para influenza virus Type 3. In the 6
For the HA assay, the result of the HA assay is shown in table 1. The results for the HA assay was obtained by observing the agglutination of RBCs in each dilution. If the whole well was homogenously red, the agglutination of RBCs had occur and the dilution present is greater than what is needed to cause agglutination. As the dilution further decreased, the interaction between the virus and RBCs does not take place and the amount of virus was decreased. If slightly pink/salmony/cloudy suspension was observed at the bottom of the well, that means that the virus present is adequate enough to cause agglutination and that was the end point where virus concentration was adequate enough to cause the clumping of RBCs (refer to the appendix 1 for details). For the HI assay, the result of HI assay is shown in table 2. This method of haemagglutination inhibition (HI) is used to differentiate a virus from other depending on the antibody used, as some antibodies may react only to certain viruses. To determine the HI titre, the 2 antibodies which could have reacted to the unknown virus provided were used.
From table 2, the 6 As the 6 Refer to the appendix for calculations and the method for the contents of each well. As antibody Y did not inhibit agglutination of RBC, it is not the antibody for the virus provided. Therefore the virus was concluded as influenza A virus as it was known that antibody X contains the antiserum for influenza A virus.
The objectives of the experiment set have been achieved. The aims of the experiment are to determine the HA (haemagglutinin) titre of a virus stock, to identify that virus on the basis of reactivity with known antisera and to determine the HI (Haemagglutination inhibition) titre of the specifically reactive serum by the combination of the HA and HI assays.
The HA titre was determined by determining the dilution point at which the last agglutination was seen. In the X rows of table 1, the 7 The HA titre of the virus was concluded as 6400 which can be calculated by doubling the dilution factor for each well (2x2x2x2x2x2x2=64). This shows that the concentration of the virus in the original stock is 6400 HA units/ml. From the HA titre, a dilution of the original virus stock was prepared such that it contains approximately 160 HA units/ml.
The experiment was successful and accuracy of results obtained demonstrated the specificity of HA and HI assays. The known end points were observed and the virus was successfully identified. However, there were some limitations and source of errors. For regular dilutions, assumptions are made that the volume transferred of each dilution is accurate which is impossible to achieve due to precision limitations of pipettes used to transfer the samples. This is because the dilution factor used to calculate the original stock is inaccurate and hence the titre and amount of virus in the stock calculated is not accurate. Furthermore, the dilution process might not fully homogenously mix the virus stock. Additionally, the same amount of time was not given to each of the wells and this will result in different haemagglutination effect on the RBCs. Also, the removement of the supernatant after the sediment of the RBS was not perfect, as such the supernatant contain Lysed RBCs might further complicate the determination of end points. Finally, the pipettes used were of different sizes and different volumetric readings, thus all results obtained might not were precise and accurate.
During the transferring of samples across the wells, the pipettes used might not be very accurate, resulting in incorrect dilutions. For proper agglutination to occur the RBCs must be thoroughly mixed with the virus suspension in the wells and failure to do so will not result in haemagglutination. Furthermore, the viruses needed a rather significant amount of time to attach to the surface of the RBCs. If the RBCs were not given enough time to settle down to the bottom of the well or if the RBCs were lysed a cloudy pink suspension might be obtained instead. It was rather difficult to determine the end point as it was subject to personal options and thus the dilution factor of the end point would be different. As the wells were left for different amount of time, a comparative test among them would not be very accurate.
In conclusion, the virus was identified as influenza virus A. The HA titre of the virus was 6400 HA units/ml and there was 2.88 x 10 The HI titre of antiserum was 3200 HI units/ml.