The experiment aimed to investigate conjugation and recombination in This was carried out by mixing donor and recipient strains and at certain time intervals interrupting the mating and plating on selective media. Qualitative assessment of the plates was then used to map the gene order. The chromosomal gene order was found to be
Threonine, Arginine,Isoleucine/Valine, Leucine, Proline, Histidine, Xylose
Conjugation and Recombination are mechanisms of exchange of genetic material between bacteria. Conjugation is a mating process that involves two bacterial cells forming a mating pair and transferring genetic material through contact between the two cells. Recombination is the process by which genes from the two bacteria are exchanged during mating. In terms of bacteria, recombination occurs on the DNA level where either homologous chromosomal DNA is exchanged or segments of DNA are exchanged which can lead to gene rearrangements and new allele combinations.
Here conjugation will be looked at. This involves cell-cell contact between donor and recipient achieved through an F pilus (a protein appendage) synthesized by the donor and used to anchor the recipient to form a mating pair (or mating aggregate).
Here conjugation will be investigated in In This experiment involves conjugation between an Hfr (high frequency recombination - the F factor is integrated into the chromosome) strain, the donor, and a F- strain, the recipient. The E. coli chromosome is circular and transfer always starts from the same point, the F factor integration site, which allows time of entry mapping to be carried out: As soon as the two strains are mixed mating aggregates will form and transfer of the chromosome will start from a fixed site and in a fixed orientation. If the mating pairs are physically interrupted at intervals, mapping the time of entry of genes from the donor into the recipient can create a genetic map of the chromosome.
Materials and methods
The experiment aimed to investigate conjugation and recombination in bacteria by mapping the relative order of genes along the chromosome. This was achieved by mixing a donor strain and a recipient strain, allowing them to conjugate for a certain time period to allow genetic exchange and then physically disrupting the mating pairs and plating onto selective plates. By looking at which plates showed growth at which times it was possible to map the order of genes on the chromosome.
In brief, 100ul of the donor strain (XL1-Blue E. coli carrying F factor) was mixed with 200ul of the recipient strain (X590 E. coli). Four 0.2ml aliquots were taken and plated onto selective media at time intervals of 0, 15, 30 and 60 minutes. The use of selective plates prevented donor growth. Observations were made 48 hours after plating. All plates contained nalidixic acid (NA) to prevent further gene transfer in the samples.
E. coli cells at the mid-exponential phase (OD486 of 0.400-0.600) were mixed in equal numbers at a 1:1 ratio. As soon as the cultures were mixed, 0.1ml samples were drawn. Samples 1-8 were placed on selective media with the components and concentrations as indicated in the material and methods section as well as 0.05% Nalidixic acid. Samples 9x and 9y were used as a negative control and placed on LB agar. Samples were incubated for 24 hours and growth assessed. Following this, 0.1ml of sample was also taken and placed onto the same plates again at 15mins, 30mins, 60mins and 120 minutes. Plate 1 and 7 also had their areas divided in 2 so that 0.11ml of the mixed population was spread over the plate and 0.04ml placed in the area corresponding to the recipient strain to observe for growth of this strain by itself. This was repeated similarly with the other sample plates.  The results of the experiment showed that the bacteria on certain plates started to show growth at certain time intervals whilst those on other plates showed growth at later intervals.
This was allowed to proceed for 1.5hours and at 15 minute and 30 minute intervals, 2 ml samples of the mating mixture were removed and added to 5ml of saline to hinder further conjugation. The samples were then immediately plated on selective (contains nalidixic acid to work as counter selection to eliminate donor growth) and non-selective media to select for recombinants as well as noting growth of the donor and recipient strains on their own. The plates were incubated at 37 degrees Celsius for 24 hours and the appearance of growth was then noted. The results obtained were as follows:
Table 1 – Results from Plating of Hfr and F- strains after Interrupting Mating.
From the results it is clear that the bacteria could grow earlier on some plates than others. In this case the sample selective media lacking threonine (Plate 6) grew first at time 0minutes, then both plates lacking arginine (plate 1) and with xylose as the sugar (plate 7) at 15 minutes. The sample on plate 3, lacking isoleucine and valine was next to grow then plate 4 lacking leucine at 30 minutes. Plate 5 lacking proline showed growth at 60 minutes and finally plate 2 lacking histidine at 120minutes.
From these results it can be concluded how the donor transferred the genes from the Hfr strain to the recipient. When two bacteria of different genotypes mate genetic material is exchanged. In this experiment, the Hfr strain was the donor and passed a wild type allele at a certain locus to the recipient. To map the loci of the gene, they were plated on selective media at different time intervals to see when the recipient was able to grow. If the recipient has received the wild type allele it will be able to metabolize/utilize the compound in the media and thus grow. If the recipient had not accepted the wild type allele yet, it will not grow on the selective media. Looking at the plates and the growth that occurs it can be used to deduce when each gene had entered the recipient strain.
The first gene to transfer would have been the gene controlling the production of a F pilus allowing conjugation, that is the F factor itself, and it appears from the results that this is the case as no growth is seen on any of the plates until 15 minutes where both plates lacking arginine (plate 1) and with xylose as the sugar (plate 7) showed growth. It is likely the F pilus gene is located close to the origin of transfer and so its incorporation into the recipient strain would come early in the process. Additionally the plate 2 lacking histidine did not show growth until 120 minutes, one of the latest time points, thus this gene is located late in the process after transfer of the other gene has already started. It is likely that the gene for the production of histidine is close to the end of the chromosome and so is one of the last genes to be transferred.
plates 2 (lacking histidine) and 5 (lacking proline) both showed growth for the first time at the samples plated at 60 and 120 minutes respectively. Due to the differences in growth levels between these plates at times later than 60 minutes it can be speculated that the proline gene would have transfered first probably within the first 60 minutes and the histidine gene nearer to the end of this period (120 minutes).
The order of gene organization on the chromosome can then be approximated as follows: Threonine > Arginine, Xylose > Isoleucine, Valine > Leucine > Proline > Histidine
Where
Threonine (trp) Arginine (arg) Isoleucine/Valine (ile/val) Leucine (leu) Proline (pro) Histidine (his)  This rough map of gene order shows that between 0 to 15 minutes the first two genes transferred from the donor were Threonine and Arginine, and from 15 to 30 minutes Isoleucine/Valine and Leucine were transferred. Proline and Histidine were transferred at least after 30 minutes and probably nearer the end of the time period.
Also errors may occur due to contamination in the original sample of donor strain (ie. other bacteria or pathogens) which could lead to unexpected gene transfer or errors in the results.
The procedure and accuracy of results could be improved by using a quantitative approach in which the number of recombinant colonies are counted at each time point using a viable count.
In conclusion the rough mapping of gene order along the E. coli chromosome can be determined qualitatively by physically interrupting mating pairs of a donor and recipient E. coli strain at certain intervals and noting growth levels after plating on selective media. This highlights the basic concepts and methods of conjugation and recombination in bacteria.