The purpose of this experiment is to explore the relationship between the forms of Newton's 2nd Law appropriate to linear motion and to rotational motion, explore the physical behaviour of 2nd moment of mass and to develop understanding of the nature of experimental error and the analysis of experiment data. The moment of inertia of the three discs is to be determined by experiments and compared with one obtained from a theoretical relationship.
The method used is by measuring the time for a weight to fall a distance when attach to a moment arm that is attached to a disc.
The moment of inertia of the three discs is Comparing the results with those derived from the theoretical relationship it is found to be consistent with a maximum percentage of error of 7%.
It is found that the Newton's 2nd law does hold for rotational motion. The 2nd moment of mass of an object is proportional to the mass and radius of the object. Finally a reasonable amount of care should be taken when making assumptions to simplify the experiment.
The purpose of this experiment is to explore the relationship between the forms of Newton's 2nd Law appropriate to linear motion and to rotational motion, explore the physical behaviour of 2nd moment of mass and to develop understanding of the nature of experimental error and the analysis of experiment data. At the end of the experiment, the moments of inertia of the three disc is determined and compared with the values derive using the theoretical relationship. An estimate of the precision and accuracy of the measurements will be made as well.
According to Foundation of Engineering, Holtzapple Reece (2003) torque is a twisting force, which is determined by position vector
When force is applied at right angle to the radius
Newton's second law states that Force
Substituting equation a in to b,
On the other hand
Based on the constant linear acceleration formula
The constant acceleration formula is related to the linear acceleration change. The force equation can be rearranged to To relate the force equation with linear motion equation, FMA can be rearranged giving Where
Where
The great circle Where Equation 1) is the general form of the rotational analogue of Newton's second law For the case of constant angular acceleration Where
Rotational analogy of the
Where
Reference Foundation of Engineering, Holtzapple Reece (2003)
Equation 6 is a formula that relates the rotational analogy of Newton's 2nd law with linear motion.
From the experiment, the rotational time taken can be obtained from Where M is the moment arm , r is the radius of the disc and t is the time taken. Solving for I, Where I is the calculated moment of inertia of the disc.   The theoretical value of the inertia obtained from the theory can be obtained from  Where m is the mass and r is the radius of the disc.  Comparing the results obtained from the experiment with the values derived from the theoretical relationship it can be seen that the two values are consistent with a maximum percentage error of 7%.
Please refer to appendix 1 for more detail on the theory and assumptions made in this experiment.
In this experiment the moment of inertia of the three discs using linear and rotational analogy are determined by experimenting with a weight that is attach to a moment arm. The experiment is carried out three times at three different disc sizes. The average results of the measurements are then compared with the data obtained from the theoretical relationship.  The results obtained are found to be consistent with the data obtained from the theoretical relationship. The maximum percentage of error of the results and theoretical value are 7%. From this experiment, it can be concluded that
Newton 2nd law does hold for rotational motion. The rotational analogy of the law is Whereby
This conclusion is based on the finding that
1.The moment of inertia of the three discs obtained from the experiments is consistent with that from the theoretical relationships.   2.The maximum percentage of error in the experiment is 7%.   3.The 2nd moment of mass of an object is proportional to its mass and the radius.
Assumption made during the experiment will significantly affect the results obtained. Therefore reasonable care should be taken to assure that those assumption made is justifiable and will not introduce a huge error to the experiment.