The diagram below shows the generalised amino acid:
The diagram above shows a generalised structure of an amino acid. Most amino acids consist of an amino group (-NH2) and a carboxylic acid group (-COOH) joined together by a carbon atom known as the alpha carbon. Both these groups are attached to a unique side group which determines the particular properties of the amino acid. The properties of an amino acid depend on the side group, and can range from nonpolar to polar, acidic to basic and hydrophobic to hydrophilic. The varying properties will also depend on the pH of the environment, with the side group gaining or losing charges depending on the pH. The overall charge of the amino acid and therefore whether it is an ion at any particular pH can be calculated using the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation (pKw=14.7).
Experiment to Determine Isoelectric Point of Casein, Haemoglobin and Cytochrome c  Introduction  The purpose of this experiment was to investigate the isoelectric points of casein, haemoglobin and cytochrome c. The isoelectric point of a molecule is the pH at which the net charge of the molecules of a substance becomes zero. The isoelectric point of a molecule will be affected by the electrostatic forces between the molecules, determined by the 'R' group side chains present on the molecule. It is this which governs its ability to bind with other molecules and form different bond configurations. This laboratory session aimed to investigate this phenomenon by identifying the isoelectric points of casein, haemoglobin and cytochrome c. Method
This laboratory activity was undertaken to investigate the isoelectric points of casein, haemoglobin and cytochrome c. By testing the reaction of these molecules in buffer solutions of varying pHs, we were able to determine the pH at which these molecules have a neutral charge.  In order to investigate the isoelectric points of casein, a series of buffers were created using the Henderson-Hasselbalch equation. This equation allows the pH of a buffer solution to be calculated from the pKa and the relative concentrations of the acidic and basic components. The equation states that:   pH = pKa + log([A-]/[HA])   Where [A-] is the concentration of the salt formed (the conjugate base) and [HA] is the concentration of the weak acid. In this experiment the conjugate base used was sodium acetate and the weak acid was acetic acid. The pK of acetic acid was also taken into account. The calculations and calculating the pH of each respective buffer are shown in section two of the appendix.  Once the buffer solutions had been prepared they were added to 1ml aliquots of a solution of casein (dissolved in 0.1M sodium acetate) in order to determine the isoelectric point of casein. From this we were able to use the spectrophotometer to measure the absorption of each respective buffer solution and from this the isoelectric point could be determined.
Please refer to section two of the appendix which contains the calculations for the pH of each solution. Please note that all nine solutions were prepared in the same way: 10ml of the appropriate buffer was added to 15ml of distilled water and the solution was stirred until all of the buffer crystals had dissolved.
The next step was to add 1ml of 1M casein solution to each of the nine test tubes (one of each for each of the buffer solutions) containing 0.3M to 1mM acetic acid. At each of the different concentrations it was visible that either complete or partial precipitation had formed. The same effect occurred for all nine samples.
Once the casein had been added to each buffer solution it was left for thirty minutes. After this period of time each sample was centrifuged, resulting in a supernatant liquid and a pellet of casein which had precipitated from the solution. Absorbency readings of each sample were then taken and the degree of precipitation calculated. These readings were then plotted in the form of a graph with pH on the x-axis and absorbency on the y-axis
Once the absorbancy of each sample had been determined, the results were plotted onto a graph in order for an isoelectric point for casein to be calculated. To do this measure the absorbance values were placed on the y-axis and the corresponding pH values on the x-axis. This data is displayed on the graph in the results section below.
The graph shows that the absorbance of casein is at its greatest at pH 5.04. As this is the pH at which the highest absorbance occurs, it must equate to the isoelectric point for casein i.e. the pH at which the overall charge of the casein molecule is neutral. As this point correlates to the pH at which the majority of the molecule had precipitated, it also shows that at this point the protein has the greatest degree of precipitation.
The experiment was then repeated using a mixture of cytochrome c and haemoglobin. Firstly the mixture of molecules was added to the buffer-barbitone and electrophoresis was then used to identify the charge of both molecules at pH 8.6. This was done by placing the sample at the origin of a piece of chromatography paper and passing current through it. After forty minutes both haemoglobin and cytochrome c had reached the end of the paper and could be seen as two distinct spots. The distances travelled by both molecules were then measured and the pH of the buffer calculated. The calculation for pH is shown on page fourteen of the appendix.
The diagram below shows the generalised structure of a protein: It can be seen that the structure of a protein is composed of amino acids which are connected by peptide bonds which form linkage between amino acids. By studying the sequence of amino acids connected by peptide bonds a protein can be divided into three domains called primary, secondary and tertiary structures. When studying the three dimensional structure of a protein the isoelectric point of the amino acids forming the protein is crucial in determining the structure the protein takes. This is because the electric charges that amino acids carry means that adjacent amino acids can form electrostatic attractions which thus form part of the overall structure. An example of this can be seen in the diagram. The diagram shows a portion (defining region) of the β-sheet part of the heamaglobin protein. It is this two dimensional region of amino acids that is the most important in ensuring that the haemoglobin protein adopts the correct three dimensional structure. By looking at the amino acid sequence it can be seen that many of the amino acids are oppositely charged due to the different properties of their 'R' groups. It is this charge that is partly responsible for the formation of the hydrogen bonds between the peptide bonds which form the β-sheet. It is interesting to note that the charge difference between amino acids and therefore the strength of the hydrogen bonds is subtly different depending on the direction of the hydrophobic and hydrophilic sides of the 'R' group. For example the lysine and aspartic acid in region of the β-sheet have charges on their 'R' groups that differ due to differences in the dipole moments of their molecules. This in turn due to differences in the isoelectric point of the two amino acids means that the isoelectric point of haemoglobin can be used to manipulate the three dimensional structure of a protein.
We can also compare the distances travelled by both samples in order to roughly determine the isoelectric point of each. As the haemoglobin sample moved only one and a half centimetres we can say that it was less affected by the electric field (i.e. it had a smaller potential difference) than cytochrome c, which moved by four centimetres. In other words, the isoelectric point of haemoglobin is closer to pH 8.6 than the isoelectric point of cytochrome c, so that in the experiment haemoglobin had a net charge nearer to neutral.
The aim of this experiment was to investigate isoelectric points of different molecules hence determining the isoelectric point of casein, haemoglobin and cytochrome c.
Firstly casein. The method we used was indirectly determining the isoelectric point by measuring the absorbance of varying concentrations of acetic acid with casein. The results we received indicate that the isoelectric point of casein is around 5.04. This value is logical and in agreement with accepted values of the isoelectric point of casein, however due to the nature of the experiment the value can only be considered as approximate. To increase the accuracy of this value, further dilutions of the acetic acid and small variations to the pH could be used to identify the exact point at which the net charge on the casein molecule is neutral.
In order to find the isoelectric points of haemoglobin and cytochrome c we undertook the method of electrophoresis. This method did not enable us to calculate the exact isoelectric points of the two samples, however, due to the fact that a mixture of the two molecules was subjected to an electric field of a relative fixed strength (this was the result of using a buffer-barbitone with a pH of 8.6) we were able to determine that the net charge of cytochrome c was greater than that of haemoglobin. This information therefore indicates that the isoelectric point of haemoglobin was closer to pH 8.6 than that of cytochrome c.  A method which would have allowed us to calculate the exact isoelectric points of both haemoglobin and cytochrome c would have been to mix known concentrations of the molecules with buffer solutions of different pH. A series of samples could then have been taken from each buffer solution and the isoelectric points determined using the electrophoresis technique. This would have enabled us to compare the degree of movement of each molecule in the different pH buffer solutions and thereby calculate the exact isoelectric points of both haemoglobin and cytochrome c.
In summary, various methods can be used to identify the isoelectric points of different molecules.