Since the emergence and characterisation of In recent years the incidence of Legionnaires' disease has increased. This essay aims to understand the characteristics of
Legionnaires' disease (LD) is a potentially deadly respiratory illness that is caused by the inhalation of aerosolised contaminated water containing the Gram-negative bacterium, Legionella pneumophila. Symptoms vary from person to person however they commonly include high fever, disorientation, lethargy and lung infections. Although other species of the Legionella genus can cause the illness, Legionnaires' disease is primarily caused by L. pneumophila and is easily spread through aerosols or water droplets. The bacterium has a number of virulent characteristics, however the key factors for it's success as a pathogen have been identified to be; its resistance to cleaning agents and water treatment, its ability to colonise and replicate in aquatic environments and amoebae, and its secretion of toxins and other virulence factors such as Flagellin and Mip which are essential for its transmission and survival in human alveolar macrophages. Whilst many of the virulence factors of this organism remain to be discovered, research has shown that particular components of complement (C3 and C5), secreted proteins, bacterial motility, and cell-mediated immunity play a pivotal role in the transmission from water sources to susceptible hosts.  Whilst Legionnaires' disease is seen as a life-threatening illness, a lesser understood, but closely related, form of this bacterium, is Pontiacs Fever. Pontiacs Fever is caused by ingestion of Legionella, which as previously stated, is highly prominent in water systems. The symptoms of Pontiacs Fever are much milder, including fever, chills and headaches, however mortality is rare and no fatalities have been recorded to date.
It wasn't until 1976 when an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease struck an American Legion convention killing 29 people, that It is now recognised that
Legionnaires' disease is primarily caused by inhalation of the bacterium, Aerosols are composed mainly of contaminated droplets, typically less than 5 μm in diameter, generated by sources such as hot tubs, showers and air conditioning units (5). These droplets can be carried considerable distances from the infected source and when inhaled They are too small to settle out of the air and hence cause infection (6). Legionellosis is found mainly in moist, humid environments and is associated with natural water courses, land based reservoirs, hospitals and air conditioning systems due to the presence and subsequent growth of To appreciate the effects and characteristics of Legionellosis, we must firstly understand the various processes that it undergoes during transmission. Bhardwaj et al. (1) shed some light on this by studying the transmission routes of when it is at various stages of its growth cycle. When Legionella organisms exist in the external environment, they are disseminated to the primary host cell, alveolar macrophages, by the inhalation of
The spread of Until the development of water reservoirs (e.g. cooling towers) and evaporative condensers of air conditioning systems, However, in recent years the number of Legionnaires' outbreaks has increased, the majority occurring during the summer months when use of air conditioning is generally greater.
By examining the processes occurring within such water storage and distribution systems we can gain an increased understanding of why more and more outbreaks are being recorded. Firstly, as with any surface, biofilms form within water storage systems. A microbial biofilm consists of bacterial colonies attached to each other and their surface by the secretion of adhesive polysaccharides. In adverse environments, i.e. nutritionally deficient conditions, biofilms trap essential nutrients (for example iron), providing a rich environment for bacterial growth. As the number of large-scale water storage and distribution systems has increased, more buildings now contain reservoirs of In practice, these reservoirs cause an increased threat to humans due to inadequate cleaning and water treatment standards which don't remove the organisms before they have chance to replicate and spread to potential hosts.
Legionnaires' disease was first recognised as a distinct clinical entity in 1976 after an outbreak at an American Legion convention in Philadelphia that killed 29 people (1,2). This outbreak led to the discovery of Legionella pneumophila, a Gram-negative, aerobic, non-flagellated, intracellular pathogen responsible for the majority (over 90%) of Legionnaires’ disease cases (3).  Unlike many other waterborne diseases, Legionnaires' disease is not spread by direct contact or through drinking or recreational water (3). Instead, its primary route of transmission is through the inhalation of aerosolized water droplets containing viable Legionella bacilli, which can exist and replicate in various water systems, including cooling towers, evaporative condensers, whirlpools, showers, and air conditioning units (4,5). In addition, the Legionella species has been found in natural aquatic environments, including lakes, rivers, and streams (3,6).  The emergence and characterisation of Legionnaires' disease in recent years has increased the incidence of the illness in both endemic and sporadic cases (1,7). Outbreaks are most commonly reported during the summer months when use of air conditioning units is at its highest, suggesting that a single or source of legionellosis-contaminated aerosols is responsible for inhalation of the organism by susceptible individuals (1,8).  There are numerous similarities between the life cycles of Legionella pneumophila and other waterborne pathogens, with both species having an ability to form biofilms on their environmental surfaces. Biofilms are defined as complex microbial communities held together by a matrix of sticky glycoprotein and polysaccharide exudates, which trap essential but limiting nutrients, such as iron (9). Certain species of amoebae, which are found in large-scale water storage and distribution systems, can also harbour Legionella pneumphila, while forming a physical barrier between the bacteria and disinfectants (3).  In addition to the generation of Legionnaires' disease, Legionella pneumophila can cause a less severe form of the disease known as Pontiac's Fever. The symptoms of Pontiac's Fever include fever, chills and headaches and to date evidence has only been noted during Legionnaires' outbreaks, with no recorded mortalities from this form of the infection (10,11).  By examining the processes occurring within such water storage and distribution systems, it is possible to gain an increased understanding of why more and more Legionnaires' outbreaks are being reported. The majority of these outbreaks occur due to inadequate cleaning and water treatment standards, which means Legionella bacilli are not removed from these systems before they have chance to replicate and spread to potential hosts (1). Furthermore, nutritionally deficient biofilms provide the ideal niche for bacterial growth, leading to increased risk of contaminated aerosols (9).
In addition to protecting There are numerous similarities between the life cycles of The effects of such research is summarised in figure 1:
This research therefore indicates that the strategies evolved by
Legionnaires' disease is a severe form of pneumonia caused by the inhalation of aerosolized water droplets contaminated with the bacterium Legionella pneumophila. Legionnaires' disease is characterised by high fever, chills, disorientation and eventually lung damage (1). Unlike other waterborne infections (such as cholera and typhoid fever) Legionnaires' disease is not contagious and is instead spread through inhalation of contaminated aerosols from air-conditioning systems, showers and spas. In recent years the incidence of Legionnaires' disease has increased, due in part to an increase in the number of large-scale water storage and distribution systems. This essay aims to further understand the characteristics of L. pneumophila and the possible reasons for the increased incidence of Legionnaires' disease.  L. pneumophila is an aerobic Gram negative bacterium belonging to the order Legionellales, family Legionellaceae. This organism has complex nutritional requirements and requires unusually high levels of iron and cysteine (2). These requirements are partly explained by the activity of the two major haem-acquisition systems VDs and TOs which are essential for obtaining iron from the eukaryote hosts cells (3). Other components of L. pneumophila's nutritional requirements include low levels of sodium (NaCl) and aromatic compounds (4). Unlike other waterborne pathogens (which are often transmitted through drinking or recreational water) the spread of Legionnaires' disease is primarily caused by aerosols containing the bacteria being released by air-conditioning systems and showers etc.  It wasn't until 1976 when an outbreak of Legionnaires' disease struck an American Legion convention killing 29 people that it was even recognised as a separate entity. Since that time, a number of clinical studies and epidemiological investigations have been carried out to understand the characteristics of the organism and the increased incidence of the disease. In addition to the generation of Legionnaires' disease, L. pneumophila is also capable of causing Pontiacs Fever. Pontiacs Fever is a mild form of flu-like illness with symptoms that include fever, chill and headaches. To date evidence of Pontiacs Fever has only been noted during Legionnaires' outbreaks and in comparison to Legionnaires' disease there have been no recorded mortalities from this form of the infection.  Until the development of water reservoirs (e.g. cooling towers) and evaporative condensers of air conditioning systems, conditions wouldn't have been ideal for the successful growth and colonisation of L. pneumophila. However, in recent years the number of Legionnaires' outbreaks has increased, the majority occurring during the summer months when use of air conditioning is generally greater. By examining the processes occurring within such water storage and distribution systems, such as microbial biofilms and amoebic-bacteria association, we can gain an increased understanding of why more and more outbreaks are being recorded.  Along with environmental factors (mentioned previously) the role of the humoral (involved in the detection and elimination of foreign entities via the circulatory system) and cell-mediated (detection and destruction of cells infected with foreign organisms) responses must be taken into account.  Firstly, research has shown that it is capable of surviving and even replicating within several species of amoebae, e.g. N. Gracilis and Acanthamoeba polyphaga (5). Furthermore, it has also been noted that L. pneumophila can survive and be transmitted by water treatment processes due to its diverse range of defence mechanisms. These range from impermeability of cell membranes and increased expression of proteins involved in iron acquisition, to the ability to resist desiccation (6). In addition, amoebae also provide a protective niche to the bacteria due to its resistance to biocides, mutation responses and ability to form biofilms (7).  The presence of amoebae in water systems therefore poses a considerable threat to humans due to their ability to protect L. pneumophila from biocides and water treatment processes (8). This fact can be demonstrated by a study examining water samples obtained from five hospitals in Paris. Of the samples taken, 71% contained amoebae and 47% showed presence of L. pneumophila (9). When these water samples were incubated, bacterial replication occurred, providing the sample contained amoebae (10).  This ability to replicate is further supported by in vivo studies of mice infected with L. pneumophila in either its replicative (intracellular) or non-replicative (extracellular) form. The mice infected with the replicative form showed infection of blood mononuclear cells and persistent bacteraemia, features that weren't observed in the mice infected with the extracellular form (11).  From this evidence we therefore conclude that replication in amoebae increases the virulence of L. pneumophila and consequently presents a greater threat to humans.  The ability of the organism to attach to and replicate in macrophages which travel freely in the bloodstream, means that L. pneumophila is protected from the humoral immune responses, which include factors such as components of complement and specific antibodies. These would have typically opsonised the bacterium, directing it to phagocytes who would then clear the infection (12).  In general, when a host organism becomes infected, it is the job of both the innate and humoral immune responses to clear that infection. In the case of L. pneumophila, however, evidence suggests that it is primarily the cell-mediated response which clears the bacterium.  Horwitz et al. (13) demonstrated the importance of the cell-mediated response in non-susceptible hosts. The activity of peripheral blood mononuclear cells from recovered individuals in comparison to age and sex matched controls was measured. The findings of this research are summarised in figure 3 and show that clearly a specific T-cell response has occurred in the recovered patients.  In addition to the data described on the previous page, the supernatants of samples of patient cells exposed to heat-killed L. pneumophila showed greater ability in killing than supernatants from control cells. This therefore supports the idea of a cell-mediated immune response.  There are many stages to the cell-mediated response, however as previously discussed these are only feasible in non-compromised host cells. A critical activator is interferon-gamma (IFN-g). Bhardwaj et al (14) demonstrated that IFN-gamma and tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) induce a host defence response by activating the macrophage to secrete toxic chemicals and lipo-proteins essential for bacterial destruction. In addition, IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha also induce an increased expression of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class 1 and II molecules, allowing for antigen-specific killing of bacteria infected cells (15).  The evidence presented to support both the humoral and cell-mediated response to L. pneumophila infection suggests a characteristic change in bacteria phenotype as it passes through the various stages of infection. As described in figure 4, upon entry into the macrophage, enzymes are secreted through the dot/ICM type IV secretion system in order to facilitate its replication. Examples of proteins lost from the phagosome during membrane remodelling include the lysosomal marker LAMP-1 and transferrin receptor. The loss of LAMP-1 prohibits the promotion of fusion between early and late endosomal compartments and the loss of transferrin receptors stops the endocytic pathway from occurring and hence virulent bacteria build up in the phagosome (16).  From enzyme activation and membrane remodelling to the production of toxin, flagellin and osmotolerant mutants, L. pneumophila has developed and employed a number of different strategies in order
Legionella pneumophila is a Gram-negative, non-motile, aerobic, opportunistic pathogen found in freshwater systems throughout the world.
In general, when a host organism becomes infected, it is the job of both the innate and humoral immune responses to clear that infection.  Even with the presence of specific antibodies there is little increase of monocytic bactericidal activity. Horwitzal. (13, reviewed in 1) demonstrated this by incubating serum- resistant encapsulated It was observed that the number of colony forming units (CFUs) decreased by 2.5 logs. Another similar treatment reduced These data therefore indicate that complement, specific antibodies and polymorphonuclear cells cannot resolve infection and therefore partly account for the ability of
The innate immune system recognises bacterial components such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and mannose residues on soluble proteins and reacts Much like the innate and humoral immune responses, the generation of these reactive oxygen species (ROS) and inflammatory cytokines therefore destroys the pathogen, eliminating it from the host (14, reviewed in 1). In addition, the presence of the microorganism stimulates the production and expansion of T cells
Cluster differentiation antigen 4 (CD4) is found on the surface of T helper (Th) cells, which are responsible for the acquisition and transduction of the signal (17, reviewed in 1). Interleukin-2 secretion follows the binding of antigen to CD4, and this acts as an activating signal for the recruitment of effector CD8 T cells (18, reviewed in 1). It is these CD8 T cells that represent the main weapon against intracellular pathogens. CD8 T cells have been shown to respond to
In addition to the data described on the previous page, the supernatants of samples of patient cells exposed to This therefore supports the idea of a cell-mediated immune response.
There are many stages to the cell-mediated response, however as previously discussed these are only feasible in non-compromised host cells. A critical activator is interferon- Bhardwaj et al (16, reviewed in 1) demonstrated that IFN- The ability of IFN- This therefore indicates that the pool of iron in activated macrophages may limit the growth of Because of the ability of activated macrophages in non-susceptible hosts to terminate infections by
In order for infection by Legionella to take place, the bacterium must first be present in an aerosol, enabling entry into the lung. To enter the alveolar epithelial cells, specific glycolipids that form part of the outer cell membrane need to be recognised, allowing the passage of the Legionella. This glycolipid is called l-rhamnose and is cleaved off the In addition, to release the In addition to these receptor mediated processes, specific secretion systems are also present which aid attachment and entry into the host cell. Such secretion systems include the common type two secretion systems however my research is particularly interested in the dot/icm (derepressed outer membrane and retained inner membrane complex) type IV secretion system, as shown in figure 1 below:  Once attached to the initial glycolipids, These proteins known as effectors are then transported by the The purpose of such effectors is therefore to alter the characteristics of the phagosome such that it cannot complete maturation and hence becomes an ideal niche for the growth of Through the use of electron microscopy, Such evidence suggests that once the Bhardwaj et al (17, reviewed in 1) identified the role of the effector within the host environment. Supplementation of the culture medium with certain amino acids (asparagine, glutamine and histidine) in which viral replication is usually blocked, promoted the replication of  The next stage of the microbial lifecycle is the process of entry into the macrophage and the destruction of the phagosome. Studies have shown that the presence of
As described in the previous section, components of complement (e.g. C3 and specific antibodies) opsonize the bacterium in an attempt to remove it from the body (13, reviewed in 1). However, upon failure of complement-mediated killing, receptors on the surface of macrophages recognise the opsonins and allow a special whirling phagocytosis event to occur, characteristic of In the absence of opsonization, the Mip protein (macrophages invasion protein) found on the This Mip protein is only synthesised in response to low levels of amino acids and the consequent presence of uncharged transfer RNAs (tRNAs), which activates Rel A causing the accumulation of guanosine 3'5' bispyrophosphate synthetases (ppGpp). This accumulation results in entry into the stationary phase of replication and the expression of virulence traits that promote transmission e.g. the Mip protein. This example therefore illustrates how the growth phase of
Once inside the macrophage, vesicles containing The main virulence system employed As part of the type IV secretion system these two genes were originally designated due to their ability to transfer plasmid DNA to a recipient cell (21, reviewed in 1). However, immediately after phagocytosis of It is through these pores that effector proteins (which would otherwise be used to traffic the phagosome to the endosome) are then transported to the host cytoplasm (22, reviewed in 1). Royal. (23, reviewed in 1) demonstrated the importance of the Results showed that in contrast to wild type cells,
The multiple virulence elements discussed above are only fully expressed when replicating within macrophages. This phases represents the intracellular survival segment of the organism's life cycle and well as enabling replication also enables the evasion of nosocomial treatments. During this process the released bacteria travel from one macrophage to another via vesicles shrank from the phagosome membrane.
In order to replicae and cause disease the bacteria must take numerous steps to traverse from the atmosphere to the alveolar macrophages of the host. In order to do this, The bacteria must utilize the energy of movement and proteins to traverse mucins and other host cell proteins to enter the host cell and infect. A particular virulence factor important of this traversal is the In order for the bacteria to gain entry into the alveolar macrophage it must attach itself to the macrophage and uptake must occur to initiate an infection. The characterised ankyrin-repeats found in the region of amino acids 2-137 (Cotter & Barry, 1998) have a role in uptake.
The steps taken to invade the host cell by are complex and require a number of gene products (28-30). Foremost amongst these are the dot/icm genes (26, 28) that are the basis for the type IV secretion system. This system consists of more than twenty proteins which facilitate the translocation of virulence-promoting effector proteins between the bacterium and the host (30, reviewed in 1). By direct injection into the host cytoplasm via so called ‘pores’, these effectors can inhibit or modify physiologic responses that would otherwise hinder infection.
The range of virulence factors present on the bacterial surface not only allow a greater likelihood of entry into host cells, but also provide the bacterium with resistance from environmental stresses relevant to the aquatic environment (e.g. iron starvation and biocidal treatments). These virulence factors are also expressed as part of the unidirectional shift from generation to generation, forming an adaptive strategy suitable for successful entry into and replication within the host (1, reviewed in 1).
Within one hour after the isolated phagosome is established, numerous mitochondria are recruited to its side and approximately four hours after isolation the cytoplasmic face interacts with the host cell ER, hence establishing the site of replication (24, reviewed in 1). After fusing with the ER, Once these important transformations have occurred the It is then within the nutrient-rich environment of the lysosome that the Without the ability to replicate so profusely at the expense of the host macrophage, infection by
As the available nutrient levels gradually decline, the The mechanisms by which this response occurs is shown in figure 4:
In conclusion,
In conclusion, there are many factors which contribute to the increased incidence of Legionnaires' disease, however the primary cause is the increased need for large scale water storage systems which due to inadequate water treatment and poor maintenance, provide the perfect environment for the proliferation of pathogens. The subsequent colonisation of amoebae increases the virulence of the organism and aids transmission of an infection by several means. Finally, the inability of many host immune systems to eradicate the infection or mount a significant response to clear the infection allows the bacteria to multiply without significant health risks to the host.
C has been discussed as a possible method for eradication.
However, at this point in time no such advances have been made and therefore the main method used to prevent outbreaks of Legionnaires' disease remains the cleaning and maintenance of water systems such that microbial life is limited or prevented. Regular chemical and microbial testing of potential
The increased incidence of Legionnaires' disease in recent years is primarily due to the increased need to store water in large quantities and the development and increased usage of aerosolizing technology for example whirlpools, showers and air conditioning systems. With inadequate cleaning and the stringent water treatment policies implemented by many countries, many pathogens are not removed from such water systems and instead find themselves in the perfect niche for colonisation and transmission.
The main reservoir of these virulent bacteria is biofilms and amoebae, which protect these organisms from the hostile environment and environmental biocides, hence providing the perfect environment for these virulent strains to replicate. As these trends continue, understanding the virulence factors of Legionella species becomes evermore important, not only in developing a vaccine or biocide regime, but also in understanding the organisations defence mechanisms to such infections. With this knowledge the incidence of Such outbreaks can possibly be brought under control.
A greater understanding of the virulence factors and the characteristics of