To answer a question on Russia, I think it is first necessary to give some general details about this extraordinary and difficult to classify country. Russia stands eight thousand miles long, for much of the year it is landlocked, surrounded by foreign powers with whom it shares seas and rivers with. Russia has specific producer regions upon which some areas are dependent; Russia's variable climate makes growing hard in many areas. Russia's population in 1905 was very large and very mixed, only about fifty percent of this population was infact Russian. Nationalities including Ukrainians, Polish and Armenians made this a multi-cultural, multi-religious country which was very hard to generalise about demographically. In terms of classes, Russia had some more traditional groups such as peasants, landowners, autocracy and merchants. Whilst also having some modernising classes such as industrialists, foreigners and intelligentsia. Politically, Russia was run by a single autocratic monarch, seen as ordained by God. Democracy was seen as an evil the Russian people ought to be saved from, political parties as well as free speech were not allowed under the Tsar.
Now I wish to address the question more directly, by looking at some of the factors leading up to the revolt of 1905 and some of the reasons why the revolt failed to overthrow the Tsarist regime.
The 1905 revolution in Russia has many roots dating back to the reign of Alexander III and earlier. Economic and Social changes which had come about due to industrialisation and urbanisation of the country coupled with a high population, caused issues such as a shortage of land and industrial work. Added to this, Russia's involvement in some international events such as the Crimean war and the Russo/Japanese war as well as internal issues such as its selection of internal foes to blame for economic distress, all added to the tense atmosphere that the 1905 Revolution arose in. Read writes:
The 1903 formation of the Union of United Nobles and the Assembly of Russian Factory Workers marked a new development in Russian politics. Now groups were organising and coming together to enhance their awareness of each other's needs and grievances as well as to discuss possible actions to address them. Perhaps the most important of these organisations was the Union of Railway Workers, formed in late 1904; it had over 700 members and further bolstered these feelings of dissatisfaction and discontent. In August 1905, civil unrest was slowly gathering, and an idea that was steadily gaining support among workers, peasants and lower-middle classes was to take matters to the Tsar himself. 'On 5th January 1905 Father Gapon's march through the streets of St Petersburg ended in the massacre of unarmed workers....' Essentially this march was to present the Tsar with 'The Workers Petition'; it was hoped he would take note of their grievances and reform conditions. The march was peaceful, a symbol of hope that the Tsar would not be able to ignore, due to the appealing nature of having someone like Father Gapon - believed to have the Tsars blessing- speak for them. Its failure, 'Bloody Sunday', is probably the event that drew most attention to the campaign of 1905-06 and marks the beginning of the 1905 revolution.  From Bastille Day, armed uprisings in the countryside and the increased intensity of the civil unrest, caused the Tsar to take action. He suggested the formation of local legislatures and extensive reforms but promised not to take and drastic steps or ask the advice of the Duma. To many this was too little too late and revolutionary political parties became more and more organised. With radical socialists like Lenin, Trotsky and Martov organising party activities and the Socialist Revolutionaries, Mensheviks and Bolsheviks becoming organised officially into political parties, it seemed the revolution was gaining momentum. With the 'Manifesto of October 17th' the Tsar conceded to a Duma, albeit one with limited power. Martial law was used frequently in major urban centres with some success. After 1905 the number of strikes decreased and it seemed that the Tsar may have managed to quell the movement. However, the anti-government sentiment had increased, and intensified eventually culminating in the revolutions of 1917, in which the Tsar was overthrown.  Although the Tsar was eventually overthrown in 1917 and the aim of full revolution was achieved, by the time 1905 had finished the Tsar was still in position with only minor concessions made. Although the 1905 revolution was not the first of its kind in Russia, it did mark a new period of civil unrest; the only one to result in partial reform while the Tsar was still in power. Consequently, it has been argued by many historians, that the 1905 revolution was a failure as it did not lead to overthrowing of the Tsar. A variety of explanations on why this is the case have been given.  The first explanation is that the aims of the revolters simply were not to overthrow the Tsar, but rather to reform working conditions and coerce the Tsar in to introducing some kind of local democracy. It was never the aim of 1905 to bring about full and immediate revolution. For a consequence the concessions made in 1905 the October Manifesto it is argued were enough to satisfy the people and remove the need for further organised action. Furthermore, it is argued that the opposition to the Tsar at this time was not warned up enough to bring about full revolution
The reasons why the revolution of 1905 did not bring about an overthrow of the Tsar can be split in to two categories; those which were caused by the regime and those externally dependent factors. One of the key arguments made by historians in understanding why the Tsar was not overthrown in 1905 is that he still had some support from some sectors of the populous. By introducing a number of reforms (including the October Manifesto) along with a somewhat stiff upper lip in the face of extreme humiliation, the Tsar was able to retain some of his subject's loyalty. Arguably it could be said that those with whom the Tsar retained support were of a higher social class which many Russians would not identify with. Nonetheless, support was support, and with the likes of the Church, capitalists, and the educated middle class still in the Tsar's corner, a lot of people could be still won back. Historians such as Christopher Read emphasise the Tsars ability to 'blame' people other than himself for the current state of unrest; for example the famous 'ministerial scapegoating' and blame of the Jews for all of Russia's misfortunes allowed him to remain impartial. These scapegoats were often those of a lower social class, and thus more easily abused from a political point of view; creating a somewhat supportive climate of "Russia must remain united". Various other causes given for the 'failure' of 1905 include economic depression (with some areas heavily dependent upon particular market presence) and the attitude of the army who essentially remained loyal to the Tsar throughout
Perhaps more importantly, as mentioned earlier, the population was incredibly and significantly diverse; and this meant that there was no real clear unified goal of the Revolution. Consequently loyalty to the Tsar was still in place. 'The mass of the Russian people in 1905 still nourished a genuine veneration for the Tsar...even sympathisers with the liberals and democrats were loth to reject...the autocrat symbol of their nation". It seems that this loyalty was to the Tsar as his people's protector, rather than absolute admiration of Nicholas himself, and could work with the Manifesto provided that it was seen as an act of consideration by a Tsar acting on behalf of his people. 'Tsarism, which seemed so strong in 1905, had some potentially fatal weaknesses.' Much of its power was derived from its people's loyalty; support for it was not as robust as could be thought at that moment. That at least some sections of the population had not voiced overwhelming support for the government, increased the chances of some democratic changes taking place.
The government reaction to the 1905 uprising was an important factor in why the Tsar was not overthrown. As Christopher Read points out, it was not necessarily the 'implications and nuances of the changes taking place' in 1905 which led to the unrest, it was more the fact that these changes '...were being contained within a stubbornly unchanging framework..." By easing this unchanging framework with the concessions made in reaction to the demonstrations, the government was able to maintain their position of power. Faced with sympathy strikes, general discontent from people of all classes, the dismay of other European countries, as well as a fear that the army's loyalty was lessening, the government was forced in to conceding to certain public demands. The October Manifesto was able to quell discontent to a large extent; the upper classes felt that they now had some control, whilst the lower classes felt that they had won a small victory on which they could build upon. The Manifesto, though using very vague terminology, and lacking the Tsars sincere approval, promised Russia a more democratic society; that this manifesto infact changed little, perhaps helped lead to a different outcome for the autocracy in 1917. However, the Manifesto's mixture of reassurance of the Tsars' care for his people, sorrow at their current situation, and assurance of future amendments proved enough to ease the political tension; at least for long enough to ensure the Tsar had ensured the safety of his position. 'The welfare of the Russian sovereign is inseparable from the welfare of the people. The turmoil and unrest...fill our heart with great and heavy sorrow... We grant the population unshakable foundations of civil liberties.'
Differences between the situation in 1905 and 1917 help highlight its 'failure'; for example, although it could be argued that almost all sections of the Russian population were against the Tsar in 1905, the situation in 1917 was more acute. The opposition was more ready for action, the concessions made in 1905 had been proved insincere, scapegoats for the people's continuing misery such as Russian minorities, had grown angry and organised, and the army defied orders. Moreover, central to the 'failure' of the 1905 revolt, was the reality that its aims were initially not political, but were in fact economical. The strikers wanted better working conditions, and the peasants' land reform, though some sections of the opposition such as the intelligentsia were looking towards a more democratic society, many wanted to accommodate these changes within the existing Tsarist framework. The aims of 1905 were not revolution for the majority of people. Instead their aims seem to have been in search of better life conditions and above all to be listened to by their managers, and the authorities; and at least to some extent these aims were realised in 1905. Through striking, managers were forced to pay attention to their subordinates, and some changes such as a shorter working day were implemented. Likewise, although the sincerity of the October Manifesto, as well as the Tsars' support of it can be questioned, it was still a concession the autocracy were forced to make. Though the Duma proved to have little autonomy or power, 1905 was a building block towards further changes. I would argue that the 1917 revolution would not have occurred without it; therefore to suggest it was simply a failure seems too deterministic an explanation.
To conclude, as I have shown above, it is important to consider the cultural and economic situation in which the 1905 revolution took place in. Although this was an uncomfortable and turbulent period of Russian history, Russia at this time was not unchanging. People were reconsidering their position in society, leading many to think that a possible outcome of their actions could be reform of the existing society. Poverty and oppression of the partly educated workers, peasants and minority groups is a significant cause of unrest in Russia. The improved literacy rate as well as the spread of anti-Tsar propaganda by intellectuals among the lower classes, had led to new ideas of revolution. Furthermore the Tsar had gone to attacking the Japanese forces in part to divert attention from the despair and discontent at home. The Tsar's reaction on Bloody Sunday to oppression and a call for better life conditions, was ill thought out, causing a ripple effect which further alerted people to their rights and the government's capacity for reformation.
The government reacted to the demonstrations, strikes and peasant uprisings with some concessions, helping them to settle the people back in to the existing system. The loyalty of the military still remained in place; this was to prove more beneficial for Nicholas in 1917, when officers refused to follow orders to put down worker's protests. That the Tsar still had loyalty from the middle/upper classes, industrialists, the Church, and the army; and could still make concessions to these classes was significant in averting fullscale revolution.
Finally, I would argue that although the 1905 revolution did not bring about an overthrow of the existing order, to class it as a failure is too simplistic a categorisation. To a large extent the aims of many of those involved were achieved, at least in principle if not in reality. Furthermore 1905 was an essential factor in the eventual revolution of 1917, allowing people to see that they did have some power to change the system, alerting them to the shortcomings of the government.