The most extensive population study of the early modern period was carried out by E.A. Wrigley and R.S. Schofield, In very general terms these criticisms focus upon the following main areas. The sample of four hundred and four parish registers used to estimate national population figures makes up only four percent of the total number of parishes in early modern England. In addition, the sample includes too many large parishes (usually Northern areas) and too few smaller parishes (usually Eastern areas). London is also underrepresented in the study due to its lack of surviving parish registers. Even good registers however were inaccurate for certain periods (such as during the civil war) and thus only for the year 1662 were all the registers fit to use.
Wrigley and Schofield's reconstructions of the demography of England and Wales during the early modern period attempted to examine the links between transitions in marriage and fertility and the effects of living standards such as real wages on nuptiality. In addition they sought to evaluate the impact of mortality as a preventative check on population growth. From 1541 to 1750 England's population increased from about three and a half million to approximately six million people. In addition to these census-style figures, Wrigley and Schofield also examined the average age at first marriage. From a low of twenty three for males and twenty one for females in 1550, age at marriage began to rise in the 1560s reaching highs of twenty seven for males and twenty five for females by 1750. However between 1550 and 1650 there were significant fluctuations in these figures, with some periods of high fertility and some of very slow population growth. (e.g mid century)
The demographic trends that Wrigley and Schofield have mapped out for early modern England begin with growth between 1541 and 1661; this growth was generally steady although it slowed during the 1550s and became rapid in the 1570s and 1580s. Between 1656 and 1686 the population decreased in size before stagnating and slightly recovering between 1686 and 1750. From 1750 onwards the vigorous growth of earlier periods was resumed, although Elizabethan growth rates were not reached until the 1790s. Thus there were two periods of growth divided by one hundred years or so from the mid seventeenth century to the mid eighteenth century when population numbers stagnated. As I have suggested this basic information seems both plausible and realistic, however Wrigley and Schofield's interpretation of this information; an attempt to understand what caused this rapid growth, check and decline followed by renewed growth, seems less plausible. Or in other words, was it fertility or mortality that was the definitive factor in determining these population trends.
The theory of preventative check is based upon the Malthusian idea that poor living standards were thought to be responsible for unrestrained fertility. Wrigley and Schofield's research set out to provide evidence on the links between fertility, living standards and mortality rates. The authors were keen to show the release of fertility control due to the rise in real wages during certain periods of the early modern period and the fluctuating mortality rates. The decline in fertility during times of low living standards were termed the restrictional check, whereas the rise which ensued upon reduction of mortality and the availability of food was termed the preventative check. Thus Wrigley and Schofield's research demonstrates a close correlation between real wages, fertility and mortality, concluding that the long lag theory (a fifty year gap between changes in real wages and fertility) was correct. This would suggest that the preventative check of fertility was the most important and relatively dominant factor in these population trends.
First, the fertility figures Wrigley and Schofield employed were taken from family reconstitution studies surveyed from a very limited number of parishes, often very small, and consequently may not be representative. It is possible that the demographic regime within these parishes differed greatly from those beyond and therefore the results could be inaccurate. As J.S. Wrigley himself notes 'for thirty years this same county of Essex provides figures which I suspect are less reliable as an indication of national trends than any other set available.' Moreover, the patterns which Wrigley and Schofield drew up from estimates of marriage patterns, nuptiality and fertility rates were necessarily unrepresentative due to a lack of evidence about non-church marriages and the parental influence on when children married. Although the marriage patterns they used were a vital part of their model, and therefore valuable, it is also worth noting that marital patterns changed over time and thus a static model of nuptiality and fertility is an inaccurate application of history.
Even if the marriage and fertility rates, potentially unrepresentative and framed as they may be, are accepted as plausible, questions have been raised about the placement of emphasis in Wrigley and Schofield's interpretation. David Weir argued that marital behaviour altered considerably over time causing a shift in the dominant factor affecting fertility and thus population trends. Some have noted that it is difficult to assert the dominance of fertility on population trends, particularly when within the boundaries of the Malthusian model. 'Imposing' this framework on the fertility data has required Wrigley and Schofield to argue that a 'long lag' relationship of about fifty years existed between a change in real wages and its affects on fertility. J.A. Goldstone accepts that a lag is a plausible explanation; however suggests that reducing it to a twenty year difference would be more accurate. Perhaps in cases where inheritance would depend on parental approval influence would be quite significant, but for the majority of the population inheritance would not have been left. Although I do not wish to argue in a deterministic fashion that mortality was the most important factor in shaping the population 'replacing one bald stereotype with another', it is important to look at the quite significant part played by mortality in order to question Wrigley and Schofield's interpretations.
The two parts of mortality; starvation and disease were both influences on the early modern population, not least because their presence pre-empted any potential rise in fertility through restricting marriage partners, increasing migration and affecting prices and wages. The influence of factors other than fertility can be seen in the rise of the population despite a fall in real wages; I am afraid that I remain unconvinced by the long lag theory and thus this slowness of response between the two seems to imply that mortality had more influence than Wrigley and Schofield suggested. John Hatcher points out that the volatility of both fertility and mortality during this time is suggestive not of Wrigley and Schofield's model where '...there were very few departures from the tend line', but of a model where many influences were working to shape the population. Hatcher also notes that assumptions made by Wrigley and Schofield to fill in gaps left by poor evidence and their small sample had led to the effects of mortality being underestimated. 'A far more severe impact is revealed by the registers not included in the study and also by the abundance of wills probated in a wide range of ecclesiastical jurisdictions." Additionally, Wrigley and Schofield's determination to prove the dominance of fertility can be seen in their relegation of mortality to a mere 'condition' of population change whereas fertility is considered a 'cause'; mortality is presented as something which affects fertility rather than as an influence on population in its own right. As Hatcher points out 'in any analysis of causality the designation of some factors as 'conditions' or 'circumstances' and others as 'causes' is liable to exert a powerful influence over the outcome." What Hatcher calls 'a tangle of contradictions and reservations' in fact 'lie behind the series of confident judgements...made.'
Mortality was frequently measured as age specific death rates in parish registers and other localised primary evidences. Yet famine and other 'crisis mortality' was often quite hard to identify due to its nature; it was often more prolific in villages rather than Parish registers do often record such events, however this information can only be found in unusually good registers, or by looking at a large number of documents. Mortality did not only manifest itself as famine and starvation; although it often had an underlying role in making famine more or less severe in certain areas, disease was at times the most significant factor. N.H. Appleby found many instances where crop failures coincided with increases in deaths due to disease; this was particularly evident in Scotland and tended to create cyclical epidemics. He argues that the famine of the 1620s and 1690s were most likely caused by diseased cattle which restricted milk all over the country. The most severe example of this however was in the 1790s in many parts of England where the 'cattle murrain' was coincident with war, labour shortages and a tight food market.
Disease had specific characteristics; it was often recorded in parish registers as a cause of death and appeared in other primary evidence such as wills. Famine did not have such a 'discernable pattern to help the historian identify it' it did not have such specific characteristics, it was rarely recorded in parish registers, and those who could write (more likely the upper sorts) would have been less likely to feel the effects of famine and able to relocate in plenty of time before actual starvation set in. Several neighbouring villages would also have increased deaths, a correlation between prices and mortality should be noticeable, usually some reference to dearth would exist in one form of source or another and there should be fewer conceptions than usual. Appleby discovered that famine had played a significant part in shaping the population in Cumberland and Westmorland; at certain times it was the dominant factor causing the death toll to mount, at other times it made areas more susceptible to disease (through lessened immune systems, and through desperate importing of foods from areas with epidemics) and made women less willing and less able to conceive.
In their study of Mid-Wharfedale parishes in 1623 Moira Long and May Pickles also found that evidence of 'crisis mortality' was often a part of early modern life, if not in the form of full blown famine certainly in the form of 'crisis months'. Victor Skipp found considerable regional variation in occurrences of famine and shortages which might conceivably have led to their relative invisibility in the small sample of Wrigley and Schofield.
Throughout this essay so far, I have tried to emphasise the continuous links between mortality and fertility during the early modern period; it is this essential inter-linkage which I wish to look at more explicitly now. There were interconnections between disease, migration, death, birth rate, price and wage, amongst others; in practice of course the nature of and the strengths of these links varied, nevertheless they did exist. The incidence of famine whether long or short term affected disease rates, fertility rates and migration rates as well as affecting prices and wages as the population lessens. Likewise, high fertility could force prices up, wages down, encourage migration and make disease more probable. It seems to me that the circular nature and knock on effect of all these factors combining to shape each other and the population would be better described in terms of a set of dominoes rather than as a hinge which suggests not only the Does not the very reality of high fertility demand low levels of disease and plenty of food? And does not the very reality of famine demand high levels of population? As Laslett suggests 'each part of our subject is also our whole subject...the fund of food was obviously related to age at marriage and numbers marrying.'
Hatcher suggests that Wrigley and Schofield manipulate data to exaggerate fertility and lessen the significance of mortality; he argues that the presentation of information in Although Hatcher accepts that this was purely coincidental, 'a historical accident', it still demonstrates that the prominence awarded to fertility by Wrigley and Schofield is not necessarily historically accurate but is based more upon interpretation, evidence and methodology used. From '1551 to 1566 falling fertility was the main driving force until the "golden period of low mortality" turned the tables; 1571 to 1611 was a period of relatively stable fertility and mortality "fertility and mortality contributed equally to the steady fall", fertility was dominant from 1671 to 1691 but mortality was most clearly the more important influence on growth rates from 1691 to 1751." Hatcher sums up these characteristics and finds that 'fertility is held to dominate for around thirty-five years of the two-hundred year time span, mortality for around sixty-five years and that for a century the two variables exerted approximately equal influence." This evidence is 'immediately contradicted' by Wrigley and Schofield through the use of 'quinquennial averages', and the discarding of 'three episodes of very high mortality before 1751'.
In conclusion, despite the problems with Wrigley and Schofield's methodology and evidence the population trends they map out are plausible and the best figures historians have to work with. I have suggested however that in many ways their interpretation of the causality of this trend is flawed. The judgement that living standards and wage rates determined nuptiality and therefore fertility, or that 'marriage is the hinge upon which the demographic regime turned' is inaccurate. Family reconstitution provided data on fertility which was unreliable and unrepresentative. However, even accepting these methodological limitations the figures then seemed to be moulded to fit a Malthusian framework of preventative check homeostasis. The 'long lag' theory used to justify the lack of direct correlation between fertility and real wages over simplifies a very complex phenomenon whilst simultaneously relegating other important factors to mere conditions or circumstances rather than causes of population change. The fact that we do not know enough about marriage patterns, non-church marriages, or the parental influences over children of every day people makes the long lag an unsustainable claim.
The deterministic nature of this model undermines the significance of mortality and other factors upon population changes and upon shaping fertility. The relative instability and volatility of both fertility and mortality suggests more detail is needed in the model Wrigley and Schofield provide. Evidence such as those registers not used in Mortality in the form of starvation was often extremely hard to identify due to its lack of recording in parish registers. The type of scarcity which never developed in to full blown famine is even harder to spot, but was equally influential in shaping fertility and population. Studies of Westmorland and Cumberland, the Forest of Arden and of Mid-Wharfedale parishes reveal a mistaken and repeated underplaying of starvation, and its often very localised nature. In fact the presence and at times domination of mortality was important and deserves more attention in Similarly, although I have not focused greatly upon the influence of migration and in particular sex specific migration on population trends, through reducing the pool of those eligible for marriage, its importance should not be underestimated either. Each affected the others and each in turn was affected by many other minor demographic variables. Therefore I have suggested that a model whereby the essential interlinks of mortality, migration and fertility would prove most accurate. Hatcher claims that in total between 1551 and 1751 'fertility is dominant for 17.5 percent of the time, mortality for 32.5 percent and for 50 percent of the time the two variables exerted approximately equal influence." Manifestly he argues that causality cannot be established until it is accepted that fertility and mortality were both important factors within the early modern period '...and a host of social, cultural and economic factors played on them to help fashion demographic behaviour." To finally answer the question, I would suggest that the metaphor of fertility as a 'hinge upon which the demographic regime turned', be discarded and replaced with a metaphor which better encompasses the historical reality of the exertion of manifold influences, and a co-relation of factors which developed to shape what was infact less a regime, and more a volatile commune. 'Any valid depiction of reality is likely to resemble a vast irregular web'. 'Patterns of births, marriages, deaths and migrations helped to shape society and economy and were themselves shaped by society and economy' as I have attempted to show in this essay.