The assumption that a gap existed between the theory and the practice in the social position of women between 1500 and 1700 is a contested one. Margaret Ezell argues that the expectations of female behaviour and duty in society did infact closely match the reality of women's experiences. Looking at contemporary literature and popular opinion, Ezell concludes that contrary to many historians who view the prescribed position as restrictive and misogynistic, both scripture and conduct books infact highlighted female capabilities and praised women as 'Differences between men and women are merely superficial...women are as naturally capable as men of reason, wit and...government." However, feminists have criticised Ezell for her limited interpretation of the literature she looks at.
In this essay I will try to explore the reasons why for some women at least, the gap between theory and practice in the social position of women between 1500 and 1700 was unavoidable, and in some cases openly flaunted. I will look at the economic factors which made it difficult for women to live within their expected role, the personal factors which made this situation even harder, and finally areas of society which gave women power and control over their role, leading to a degree of negotiation and renegotiating of the prescribed position.
The position women were to occupy in society was set out to the population through a number of mediums. Scriptural references in homilies and religious services put emphasis upon '...the procreation and religious education of children, the regulation of sexual activity, and mutual comfort and support.' A distinction was made between suitable female and male duties; 'The husband was held to be the superior partner, the wife the subordinate and inferior...her foremost duty was obedience." In the advice guides published, women were seen to be 'material and passive...weak in body...and unfitted for work or public life.' As such they were expected to remain in the private sphere, '...unquestioningly obedient to her husband, accepting husbandly reproofs meekly...bearing her husbands faults...accommodating his various moods and on any breach being the first to seek reconciliation." Satires and other anti-female publications played upon the popular images of women as sexually insatiable, nagging scolds, as well as playing upon the images of marriage as an end to freedom and fun, and a life of supporting a wife who would stop at nothing to get her own way. Finally, the expected social position of women was expressed by the authorities through the law; 'nowhere did the wife appear more completely subordinate to her husband than in the common law'. However, in the eyes of the law, a woman Widows enjoyed a certain amount of freedom, however along with spinsters were so marginalised socially, for being 'master-less', and economically, with only a few poorly paid trades to work in, that they had very hard lives. Susan Amussen argues that this contradiction is one of the main reasons why the wish for '...clear subordination of wives to husbands...was never fully realised.'
The first factor which I want to look at in my argument is the economic disjuncture which existed between the ideal of a woman's social position, and the practicalities of the economic sphere. To begin with, Widows and unmarried women were used to working, previously as aprentices or servants, but many others such as midwives and dairymaids were able to maintain themselves by working outside the home. Most women were not such independent earners; they worked with their husbands in family businesses, and received a salary as such. The most 'dangerous' socio-economic phenomena contributing to the gap between theory and practice were urbanisation and the successful trades. In towns and cities because of the growing need for labour women working in domestic trades such as baking were able to support themselves without the need of a husband, which was anathema to their prescribed social positions. Urbanising trades and guilds opened further doors for women; instead of simply being apprentices to their fathers or husbands, they were actively recruited by masters in the same way men were. Similarly women were able to find work in the celebrity trades such as printing; but even here they had to ensure that their work did not conflict with their household duties; having to find the time to work when their husbands and children were not in the house.
Women were often needed in the public sphere, and even if not playing leading roles their actions still conflicted with the domesticated submission part of the role, although perhaps fulfilling the obedience part. Diane Willen argues that pauper women were actively recruited by local authorities in to the public arena. Widows were also women with access to the public sphere; they could by law take over some of their husband's trades or estates upon his death. Although often poorer widows were left very economically vulnerable, some were able to maintain themselves successfully; indeed advice guides warned men against marrying widows as they tended to be 'harder to tame' having already tasted and achieved economic independence
The second set of factors which made the social position set out for women in early modern England impossible to fulfil even if they tried, were personal factors. By this I mean factors which come about naturally as a consequence of marriage; i.e. spending a lot of time with someone, growing to know them very well and loving them. Love and caring were seen as very important aspects of a successful marriage, in particular they were seen as part of a husband's duty. However it was well documented in contemporary literature that '...more men betrayed their command through their own fondness than ever lost it through their wives rebellion'. 'Convention demanded that the wife address her husband with humility and deference...even the affectionate terms love, joy, dear and duck were not appropriate in the mouth of a subordinate." However it must have been very difficult to maintain a purely master/subordinate relationship especially when feelings of love and affection existed in a marriage. Even the most obedient wife and most masterful husband must have come across occasions when such formal address would have been inappropriate.
This also makes sense when you look at the intended role of women; while the position implied direct subordination to the husband, it also demanded that women lead the moral education of their children. Commanding obedience was a contradiction in terms when this was an issue. Furthermore, educating children in the ways of religion was traditionally the husband's role; the education of daughters had to be overseen by somebody of higher rank and was deemed an unsuitable task for a husband,
The already mentioned dualities and contradictions within the social position also made it difficult for women to keep to it. Men were to provide the control and authority, and as such were to be 'dominant' and 'virile' in order to keep their woman; 'command and government was not a privilege granted by wife to husband but a requirement of husband's manly calling'. However in order to be a 'good husband' and lead a successful marriage it was necessary for a man to be loving, caring, to give his wife an opinion particularly on matters of judgement, and to not be too 'absent masterful'. The fact that 'good governance' was seen as modulated according to the rule of 'love and gentleness', or 'softness' meant that the apparent contradiction between strong leadership but loving support when needed was something men found hard. Furthermore, advice guides show how confident and even aggressive women were when it came to stating their opinions and exercising their will, 'she should air her opinion while still holding to others. Female influence at court and in politics shows how women could not have achieved so much without command and authority. Authoritative and domineering women, whether in the private or public sphere, could not be simply 'unproblematic subservience' in order to achieve such levels of success.
Finally, a large part of why the social position prescribed in early modern England fell apart, despite people's efforts to stick by it, was due to the  dualities and contradictions it contained. Women were expected to be both obedient and commanding, both submissive and authoritative. 'Conventions of behaviour were such that female household authority entailed an authoritative but not authoritarian style.' Several writers criticised the way authority was wielded by mistresses; 'Gentlewomen were expected to command without dominating, while servants were expected to obey without accepting domination...mistresses should never have made servants feel too keenly their authority". These situations demanded a certain malleability and confidence in negotiating balanced authority, which could not be achieved if women were to simply follow the role they were taught.
Thus while official proclamations, literature and law may have professed that women be obedient, and subordinate, the reality was that there were occasions when women held command and were able to exercise autonomy within their families.
In conclusion it is clear to see that when examining women's economic position and the personal factors which arose from this, that the gap between theory and practice in the social position of women in early modern England was created by both women and men. The proper role of the wife, envisaged by both scripture and the law, was too restrictive to be attainable. It lacked the realism and accepted the existence of the double standard nature of society of the time, ignoring women's capabilities and desires. The contradictions between sexual control and passive obedience and the emphasis placed on the women as having to act 'female', as well as being expected to take their place in a male-run legal system, made it impossible to remain in the position suggested.
Susan Amussen argues that the attempts of women to remain faithful to their prescribed social position, but failure due to the impractical, unrealistic nature of the position, is shown by women's emphasis on the sexual conduct part of the role; the part that was actually achievable. Faced with the impossibility of the obedience part, women placed greater importance on strict sexual conduct. Where possible women were willing to adhere to their prescribed social positions; helping to maintain the social order so important to early modern society. The gap between theory and practice in the social position of women in early modern England should be explained in terms of its impractical economic nature and its contradictory and unrealistic expectations.