As an introduction to the essay question posed a very brief and simplified summary of Habermas's main ideas and theories seems appropriate. Habermas argued that from the late nineteenth century science, technology and industry became interdependent forming a new kind of capitalism. Habermas viewed this interdependence as meaning capitalist growth had no limits because science and technology were the new leading productive forces. This new form of capitalism used a different kind of production and allowed the '...biblical curse of necessary labour,' to be broken 'technologically'. (Habermas, 1970; 53). Originally capitalism had legitimated itself through economic notions of just exchange in the market, however due to the changes within capitalism, the exchange process itself now operated under political control. This new capitalism also required direct legitimation, this time using culture. Habermas argued that this led to a 'depoliticisation' of society, which was legitimated 'by having technology and science also take on the role of an ideology'. (Habermas, 1972; 104). A 'Technocratic consciousness' developed which affected everyone; not simply those repressed by the dominant. Habermas argued that there was no longer a lower class because everyone was now relatively rich. He argued there was no longer an exploited class, since technology was not dependent on labour; people were no longer forced to work, nor were they forcefully repressed in to their social positions. It is this universal, cultural phenomenon which Habermas's work focuses on and which replaces the Marxist questions of class conflict based on economic relations.
In this essay I will argue that Habermas retains many aspects of Marxist theory in his work, in terms of some of the concepts he uses as well as the particular area of society he chooses to study. However, his work also includes many changes to orthodox Marxian work including his view on modern capitalist development and his placing of importance on the superstructure rather than the economic base. Perhaps the most apt descriptions of Habermas's work in relation Marxian thought are as a 'positive critique' (Heller in Thompson and Held, 1982; 23) or a 'positive revision' (Layder, 1994; 187). I will argue that Habermas's ideal speech situation as a means of emancipation, though not without some merit, seems deeply flawed as the general, universal, widely used and practical system it was intended.
Habermas's work is often noted for the many changes it holds against orthodox Marxist work. His critique of Marxist thought is visible in his distinctive area of study; the cultural relations of power in modern capitalist society, which arose from the late nineteenth century, and were not within the usual remit of Marxist study, the economic structure of societies. In addition, his rejection of the structure / superstructure paradigm developed by Marx illustrates his differences to the original work; whereas under market capitalism the economic base was seen as central, under the 'technological' capitalist society of Habermas's time, the superstructure (such as media and education) became much more important. Likewise, his view on economics and class is contrary to the Marxist view; Habermas argued that everyone was now relatively rich, and because of this there was no longer an oppressed class. The last and most significant addition to Marxism, or departure if looked at from the Marxist perspective, is the ideal speech situation Habermas suggests as the key to emancipation from the universal technocratic consciousness repressing society.
Habermas's work echoes the emancipatory theme within Marxist thought; in both there exists the respective victims who need to be freed. Throughout both their theories there is the idea of repression (though in different forms) of society, which must be lifted (though by different means) in order for society to operate in equality. In both theories the definite need to change society is an inherent part of the diagnosis made for improvement. Habermas's focus on the relation of economic workings to the population, and the way this economic system is legitimated, mirrors the area of sociology which Marx chose to study. In addition, two of Marx's main concepts are maintained in Habermas; that of class conflict, although the classes Habermas defines are very different to those Marx identified; and that of ideology, although Marx's idea of the ruling class using classical economics to oppress a working class is drastically altered under Habermas.
As I mentioned in my introduction, one description of Habermas's work in relation to Marx's is as a positive critique, and indeed Habermas believed that '... Marx's analysis needed drastic revision'. (Turner, 1991; 255). Habermas argued that although Marx's analysis of economics and the class structure was perfectly applicable to the era he studied, it no longer held any accuracy for a modern society. Not only did Habermas reject the idea of a working class forced in to labour by a deceitful ruling class, but he rejected the idea that change could be brought about by economics. Habermas argued that the emergent properties of capitalism were cultural not material, and therefore argued that cultural change was necessary for more general change to occur. He also argued that Marx's predictions for the advance and eventual fall of capitalism were inaccurate; instead explaining that a new and constantly developing capitalism had emerged through the interdependence of technology and science. Thus the economic base was no longer more important than the superstructure (as had been the case with market capitalism). Habermas rejected many of the more 'romantic' features of Marx; his na (Thompson and Held, 1982; 22).
The ideal speech situation was Habermas's suggestion for emancipation from the technocratic consciousness repressing society, freezing relations of domination and perpetuating and legitimating them through positivism. Technocratic consciousness was a result of the technological / scientific capitalism of modern society. It was an ideology which mirrored the values of this capitalism; positivism, empiricism etc, it had one main interest; prediction. (Outhwaite, 1994; 13).This ideology, though repressive because it ought to only be applied to cells and microbes not subjective humans, was not delusional as was the ideology of Marx's time. It kept the masses under control, whilst only treating surface issues rather than the underlying problems; i.e. the depressed housewife feels lonely and unfulfilled with only a baby for company. However instead of identifying the problem as one of her limited and prescribed position in society falling short of her capabilities and desires, she identifies it as a medical / scientific problem, and treats it with Prozac. The problem which the ideal speech situation was set out to solve was this cycle of technocratic consciousness, never getting to the root of a problem, because you can not identify the problem other than in the medical terms such an ideology allows. (Habermas, 1971; 86).
The ideal speech situation devised by Habermas was intended to make people realise firstly that they were infact following an ideology, then to help them think outside it in a less positivistic way. He suggested that this could only happen in a doctor / patient type of situation, where outside influences are shut out and the patient is the ultimate arbiter of how accurate the analyst is. This situation should be transferred over in to social situations, thus providing everyday chances for everyday people to look beyond technocratic consciousness. (Outhwaite, 1994; 54). This suggestion was met with heavy criticism; it was argued that not everyone (for example our housewife with the small child) could achieve such a situation. Likewise it was argued that even if this kind of situation were to be achieved, the patient may believe to know their underlying problems, but infact be deluded. Finally, it was put forward that this theory, even if it worked, was dubious as an emancipatory salvation. (Outhwaite, 1994; 55). In reaction to such criticism Habermas revised his suggestion; arguing that if there was a However, the circular potentials of this were not lost on Habermas's critics; not only was this a harder situation to achieve, but it could simply result in deluded people deluding each other further. Only in an already emancipated society could critical reflection produce truth. (Layder, 1994; 189). Yet Habermas still maintained that the ideal speech situation was necessary to arrive at the truth. Habermas explained that this ideal speech situation would begin with intellectuals, who were emancipated through education, providing the model towards which education might lead society as a whole. Whether this situation would lead to emancipation, whether intellectuals are infact emancipated (those controlling education usually control dominant ideologies), and whether this transformation of the micro to the macro, would in reality be achievable, has been the subject of much heated debate.
Although some of the criticisms of the ideal speech situation appear to be largely sound, Habermas does maintain the suggestion as a valid method of emancipation. As such it appears they largely hold true. Tugendhat argued that for ideal speech to provide an ultimate structure for society, with everyone having access to the same chances of emancipation and functioning on equal levels, is far from possible. This appears largely true as social situations differ in many ways from doctor / patient relationships.
To conclude, I initially looked at the similarities and dissimilarities between Marx and Habermas, and although many likenesses are apparent in Habermas's work, such as his use of key concepts and emancipatory theme, I would not go as far to label him a Marxist. Instead Habermas resides firmly in the Marxist revisionist camp, 'abandoning or relegating' certain Marxist principles. (Outhwaite, 1994; 4). As a means of emancipation the ideal speech situation does appear to have some merit such as the idea of using culture to force through change. And if considered as a (very) long term solution this suggestion does seem more practical than I originally thought. However, as a realistic emancipation from the kind of all encompassing, universal ideology legitimating not only the continuation of technological capitalism but also the depoliticisation of the population, I think it falls short. As Tugendhat points out; the idea that freedom is simply a matter of ideal speech in the right situation is problematic in itself, even despite the further problems such as its circular tendencies of reproducing delusions already held, and the impracticalities of all people having access to the right kind of situation. To finally answer the question, it seems that Habermas, although still within the broad Marxian trend is more a Marxist revisionist than a strict follower of Marx. Habermas's ideal speech situation does seem plausible in some cases; it seems as though it could work to emancipate However when posed as a means of freedom from the kind of ideology Habermas identifies, it seems less convincing.