A survey was carried out to investigate the causes and occurrences of the emotions shame, guilt and embarrassment. Ten participants were asked to cite three examples of occasions when they would feel these emotions. Responses were then looked at for general trends and categorised as to the type of situation or response given. It was generally noted that embarrassment was a more public emotion than shame or guilt, and that shame and guilt were brought about by similar situations. These results are discussed in terms of the meanings of these three emotions and the nature of social consciousness.
The emotions shame, guilt and embarrassment are psychological responses to specific situations where an individual perceives a sense of failure or an inability to cope. Although these words are often used interchangeably, psychologists have discussed the differences between these emotions and distinguished between them (Tangney, 1996). shame involves a stronger, more lasting sense of humiliation and worthlessness, often caused by more traumatic failures, such as lying to someone close or not meeting expectations, whereas guilt is not as distressing but still causes regret and worry and is more often used to describe a milder sense of regret about a particular incident or situation (Tangney, 1996). Embarrassment, unlikely to be caused by a serious incident, is felt in situations that require social attention or conformity, and can occur from forgetting someone's name, tripping over or speaking out of turn (Glass & McAuliffe, 1999).
Method The study used qualitative methods with semi-structured questionnaires. Participants (10 undergraduate students) were asked to give three examples for each emotion, of when they would experience them. Further background information was requested such as gender, age and course of study. The questions were open-ended and few constraints were placed upon this, allowing participants to answer freely in their own words.  Results and Discussion
Method  Ten participants took part in the survey. Their age ranged from 18 to 26 years old, and both genders were present. All the participants were asked to cite three examples of occasions when they would feel shame, guilt or embarrassment. They were asked to specify events and situations rather than vague generalisations. Their responses were then divided up into categories to compare the three emotions against each other. These categories were: active events (events the participant had chosen to do) versus passive events (events out of the participants control), one-on-one/private or group/public situations, and those involving a personal relationship, versus those involving strangers or public. Answers were also looked at to assess how detailed they were; whether they described an actual event, or just a general situation. There was no control group in the study.
Methods  Ten participants, all aged between 19-23, were recruited from a university population. Participants were asked to name three occasions when they would experience guilt, shame or embarrassment, and were allowed to elaborate if they wished. Responses were then looked at for general trends and were categorised as to the type of situation or response given.  Results and Discussion  Responses generally varied but showed certain similarities; for example, almost all respondents claimed regret or guilt in relation to something they had done which had let themselves or someone else down, and was felt most when confided in someone they felt close too. Mixed in with this were descriptions of embarrassment; embarrassment being the only of the three emotions mentioned in the public situations. Embarrassment as a response to these public situations was in its mildest form.
In addition to the analysis of the data, there were also some methodological considerations to take into note.
The present study shows that although there is overlap between shame, guilt and embarrassment emotions, they are distinct feelings. Previous research from Tangney (1996) supports this idea, and also that embarrassment is a much more public emotion than the other two. Furthermore, the present study reveals that these feelings are broadly as expected; embarrassment occurs in public settings, more out of the participant's control than shame or guilt, which are linked to letting down others for whom the participant cares about or respects.
It was also noted that a variety of types of language was used, mainly simple, single words or phrases, or passive phrases such as 'being laughed at'. This kind of language usually expresses self-consciousness and implies a feeling of regret, so all the answers appear to confirm that the emotions of shame, guilt and embarrassment are closely linked.
In conclusion, shame, guilt and embarrassment are not words for the same emotion, but contrasting feelings of self-consciousness, which arise from different situations and events. Shame and guilt emotions were considered similar, arising from personal failure or failing what is expected of a close relationship. Embarrassment arose from uncomfortable, unfamiliar public situations, which could not be controlled. Embarrassment tended to be a more trivial and transient emotion, but it also reflected a lapse in what is expected in social environments. These findings tell us something of the nature of social interaction; self-conscious emotions are brought about from a failure to comply with what is socially expected of a person, either in personal relationships or social situations. It would appear that these emotions are closely linked to the idea of conformity; people judge themselves based on what they assume others would think yet tend to be their own worst critic.