The title of David Landes' seminal 1998 work 'The Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Why some are so rich and some so poor' encapsulates the prevalent question among modern society of why there is such a great disparity of wealth between countries. With the benefit of hindsight, events such as the Industrial Revolution have contributed to a Eurocentric opinion of western superiority, at least until the development of modern North America. However, in the year 1300 this was not the case as in actual fact East Asia possessed a more advanced society than anywhere in the West. During the early modern period, Asian technological and agricultural innovations were envied by Europe, for at this point Europe was no more likely than East Asia to experience an industrialisation process. The economic divergence between East and West However, many of these claims are rather over-enthusiastic in their emphasis. Whilst European climate was more suitable to agricultural productivity, Asia's technological advantage counteracted this through the creation of irrigation systems. In fact, the West adopted several of their inventions. The first two sections of this essay will focus upon demonstrating that these two factors can be encompassed- like many other explanations- within the greatest reason for slow Asian economic progress: attitude. The comparative superiority of East Asia in 1300 meant that competitive spirit was not fostered in the same manner as Europe, and that attempts to regulate their admirable systems enforced an introverted society based on centralised state control, Sino centric governmental policies and hierarchy. The final section portrays how the effects of this attitude accumulated across most facets of East Asian society creating a rather stagnant economy, not conducive to the burgeoning trade and emerging global networks that Europe was able to exploit.
Climate and environment are two very prevalent claims for East Asia's divergence from the West, which Landes also notes. He claims that: 'where Europeans were able to work small family farms, their Asian counterparts were limited to large productive units, the economy of intensive (and exploitative) labor' The environment was a hindrance, for unlike Europe, the East does not experience seasonal rainfall; in many parts of Asia it rains for long periods and then not at all, for 'Indochina and parts of China, Japan and India all receive a majority of their annual precipitation in the form of holiday rain' This lack of consistency contributed to a lack of agriculture, with a third of East Asia's terrain consisting of desert and steppe land, and it 'confronted its inhabitants with a major problem' Landes' conclusion was that 'no societies build rich cultures in deserts or on steppes'
Whilst this has elements of truth, it fails to note Asia's technological superiority. East Asian irrigation systems developed during the early centuries of the millennium, such as the Grand Canal of China, were far superior to their European equivalents. Also, hydraulic devices such as the Persian wheel created a more effective method of drainage, meaning that peasants could, to some extent, control the natural environment. In comparison, much of European environmental control was still in its primordial stage, reliant upon animal powered ploughing and agricultural techniques such as three field farming- a process with low efficiency due to crop-rotation.
The discrepancy between East and West led to a state attitude of control towards essential resources, namely water. Water was arguably the most important resource in developing agricultural production, and East Asia had to cope with regular flooding and consequently regulation of their rivers via construction of dykes was necessary. In China, the disastrous floods of 1612 led to the resignation of the Grand Eunuch Gu Magi; this event signified the start of a more methodical approach to control. By 1667 the Chinese ministry of works had taken control of maintaining rivers with the 'Great Canal' being completed ten years later. Even then, completion of the Great Canal was not solely for the custom of trade: its object was to provide a means for transporting troops quickly between the East and West of the country. Thus, state involvement in water control was twofold: trade could be transported along the new canals and army passage was encouraged. Similarly in Japan the 'dual cogs of government and finance' underpinned the complete regulation of rivers and coastlines, mainly via their Bureau of Rivers and Mountain. As Fairbank claims, 'in China, and to some extent in Japan, irrigation was an almost entirely state prerogative'
State attitude towards irrigation was also due to ecological constraints in East Asia. Demographic changes were of much greater concern in the East than Europe, as it was experiencing a period of rapid population growth- in 1750 Japan had a population of approximately twenty eight million, and the Chinese population grew from approximately 100-150 million in 1650, to 200-250 million by 1750 This increase created a rapidly escalating need for food, therefore the states' primary concern was provision rather than profit. Demographic growth was also somewhat self-perpetuating; increased demand for food necessitated extra manpower for cultivation. This created a culture in which early marriage and many children were encouraged, which led to yet more food and therefore manpower being needed. As P.H.H. Vries notes 'China's internal transport with its densely knit system of waterways probably was the most efficient in the world' Efficiency was essential, and therefore demography hampered the East Asia's chances of large-scale commercialisation and industrialisation more than the environment itself. Landes emphasises climatic differences too fervently, for it was resulting ecological constraints the state's response and that hindered economic progress. As the next section explains, East Asia was able to overcome natural disadvantage through technology; however, their success was brief, for technical superiority highlighted problems similar to those posed by state control over water.
Technology is a representative case of how the potential for development in East Asia was not wholly fulfilled, whereas Europe learned from Asian inventions and progressed ahead of them. The East experienced many technological developments, such as the aforementioned irrigation system, prior to Europe and by the early modern period they possessed a level of superiority. For instance, China explored rudimentary time measurement with water clocks during the Song period (960-1279). Also, agriculture was advanced not only through hydraulic engineering such as ditches and dykes, but through the development of an iron plough during the sixth century, which could adjust the depth of the furrow. Asia, in fact, was responsible for some of the most fundamental inventions in early history: the compass (960 AD), gunpowder (tenth century), paper (100 AD) and printing. As Joel Mokyr notes 'by the end of the middle ages, it appears that China was about ready to undergo a process eerily similar to the great British Industrial Revolution' However, this prophetic stage of development was not fulfilled in the manner that European technological development succeeded.
The main problems with Eastern technological development were that either significant inventions were forgotten, or other advancements were not enhanced to their full potential. In the first instance, time measurement is an excellent example. Achievements such as Su Sung's forty-foot high clock, produced in 1086, had faded by the sixteenth century. Nothing like the European weight-driven clocks were developed, and in the seventeenth century the Jesuits were able to use the novelty of western timepieces as an attraction towards their appeal in the East. Also, in agriculture, many of the superior Asian techniques were forgotten even though they had been recorded. For instance, Wang Chen's work 'Treatise on Agriculture', published in 1331, had only one copy left by 1530. As Mokyr concludes 'a gradual deceleration took place that by the nineteenth century resulted in unmistakable backwardness compared to Europe' The second factor is more important in explaining divergence as many of East Asia's inventions were adapted by the west, which they developed further in order to enhance industrial progress. For example, although the Chinese invented printing, the process that they created was xylography- a wooden block with the text carved on it on reverse, which was then imprinted onto paper. Europeans adopted this technique throughout the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, however they progressed to using moveable letters when printing documents, which allowed for articles to be printed and subsequently circulated with higher frequency. Although Korea used metal moveable type from 1240 onwards, Asia as a whole failed to develop a similar system in parallel to the West. Another example of Eastern loss of technological superiority is warfare. The Chinese invented gunpowder, but it was used predominantly in rockets and bombs. Overall their weaponry consisted of more antiquated equipment such as bows and arrows. Europe, however, brought gunpowder back to the west and developed cannons. The East then had to learn how to use them from their European counterparts. Even then there were differences in reception throughout East Asia; Japan embraced western inventions, whereas throughout the sixteenth century Chinese officials had to repeatedly ask for the Chinese army to adopt the cannon before it was introduced.
Overall, in explaining East Asia's dwindling economic progress E.L. Jones' claim that 'the technological category of explanation is probably a diversion' Europe's success lay in its interest in Eastern inventions and their subsequent desire to improve upon them. East Asia's attitude, on the other hand, seemed to be the antithesis of Europe, for they had little interest in what the West had to offer unless it became a vital acquisition (such as the cannon). Creativity was not encouraged within the East, for in China even the most prosperous emperors such as K'ang Chi (1622-1722) and Ch'ien Lung (1736-1795), as Mokyr notes, 'discouraged the kind of dynamism that was throbbing throughout Europe at that time' As the next section of this essay will demonstrate, technology is an illustrative example of an Eastern ethos that restricted growth in many aspects of economy and society, an ethos which can be labelled as the most prominent cause for the slowing of East Asian economic progress.
One of the greatest areas where attitude constricted eastern development was trade. Interest in long-distance trade had prevailed during the late twelfth and early thirteenth centuries, but this was not a lasting feature of Asian history- after 1431-33 there were no more economic or diplomatic voyages made by China during the early modern period. The East's loss of interest in the West was the opposite of European attitude; in 1498 Vasco de Gama discovered a sea trade route between Portugal and India, the first Portuguese ships reached China by 1514, and the Spanish had occupied the Philippines by 1565. Whilst the East had retreated, the West had attempted to encroach upon their land and exploit newfound areas for luxury goods.
Europe was predominantly focused on the acquisition of luxury items, primarily silk, spices and porcelain; John Fairbank observes that 'China had come to command almost the entire European market among fanciers of the exotic' By the early seventeenth century Chinese porcelain accounted for a quarter of Dutch imports from the East Indies.
Whilst competition between Spain, Portugal, England and the Netherlands drove economic and territorial expansion in the West, East Asian policies began to restrict the dividends of European interest. In China, as Fairbank continues, 'mercantile interests were felt to be inherently in conflict with those of society and the state and had to be curbed as far as possible' Sea voyages were restricted to small vessels and the Ming dynasty (1368-1644) banned private trade abroad. Similarly, Japan only operated with After 1639 they extended this attitude to a However, C.A. Bayly notes that the early modern period 'saw the rise of the European chartered companies...in the Asian world' China and Japan may have proved difficult to infiltrate, but the lack of competition that they provided allowed Europe to maintain acquisitions like the Spanish occupation of the Philippines, and capitalise upon available resources such as control of the Indian textiles market. The Western exploitative attitude towards trade allowed them to gain products that improved their wealth and economic progress, whereas East Asia had little to gain in return except silver, which it did not mint to create commercial unity or ease of transaction.
As well as expanding eastwards, Europe also gained an extremely valuable advantage above Asia through Columbus' discovery of the Americas in 1492. Acquisition of the New World supplied the West with new food products, a territorial outlet for an expanding population, and resources such as coal. In terms of food, the Americas provided protein-rich fish from the Caribbean and alternative staples to wheat such as maize and potatoes. The Spanish introduced cattle to Latin America, which meant that Europe was able to import beef as well. Asia did adopt maize, potatoes, sweet potatoes and peanuts from the New World into their diet, which increased the land under cultivation by thirty five percent between 1660 and 1760, as these new products could be grown in drier conditions than rice. However, these lands were a lower yield than the paddy fields, and deforestation to plant the new crops caused soil erosion and flooding into the low lying, fertile areas. As Bayly concludes, the New World was of most benefit to the west because it provided 'new, nutritious varieties of food...(which) spread across the Old World in the wake of the Spanish and Portuguese "discoveries", improving fertility and resistance to disease' Better diet enabled a stronger workforce, conducive to increasing production.
The New World was also an important asset in terms of population; migration relieved the pressure of demographic growth, and colonisation allowed the exploitation of indigenous people and imported African slaves in order to provide cheap labour. This was particularly useful for the extraction of one of America's most useful resources to the west: coal. Kenneth Pomeranz, in particular, stresses the importance of coal to Europe, as the transition from a timber to coal fuelled society 'relaxed the land constraint in a more fundamental way than any other innovation before turn-of-the-century chemicals and electricity' Although Pomeranz disputes that divergence occurred before 1800, Europe definitely exploited American resources from the moment of discovery. East Asia had coalmines but they were not as accessible as those in the New World; China's best coal deposits were in Shaanxi, 700 miles from the country's main area of production the Yangzi Delta. Parthasarathi concludes that 'the massive use of coal certainly made possible an energy economy that far surpassed one based on timber and made possible huge iron output, the steam engine and eventually railways' The Americas gave the West nutrients, fuel and territory that it could exploit and command, altogether creating the potential for an energised society capable of increased economic production and therefore greater prosperity. Whilst Pomeranz's conclusion stressing the cruciality of coal and colonies is both overzealous and too late in history to explain economic divergence by 1800, the New World provides a good example of how Western attitude to trade and exploitation helped them to progress ahead of the East.
The backward attitude of the East extended further than their approach to trade; Asian government and state policies were centred on hierarchy and repressive central control. In China, as Fairbank notes, the government: 'operated vertically, from the state upon the individual, more than it did horizontally, to resolve conflicts between one individual and another' This made deviation very difficult, especially since the law was viewed as ultimate in sanctioning behaviour, with legislation predominantly concerning public activities. As Stephen Haw notes, 'the courts were intended to be terrifying places, which good citizens would avoid at almost all costs' The later Ming dynasty advocated repressive rule as they sought a controllable environment, and the successive Qing rule extended Ming foundations by ceasing all public services. Without a formal police force, commercial law or road maintenance, China was denied some essential elements for economic development. This was further exacerbated by the fact that the local governments under central Qing rule were somewhat ineffective, for the population of around two hundred million was divided into only eighteen provinces. An imperial bureaucracy based upon centralised control left little capacity for the accumulation of private profit. Similarly, Japanese politics was based on a philosophy of absolute government. Mason and Caiger observe that the Shogun held 'a right to command which could extend, if need be, to each man, woman or child in the country' This detailed level of control fostered an environment in which obedience was key. Across East Asia the state 'oversaw, regulated and repressed'
Europe, on the other hand, possessed an advantage in its state control: it was politically fragmented. Differences in governments created competition between countries, which led to the desire for economic superiority and the emergence of city-states. As Van Zanden observes, only in Europe did city-states 'manage to dominate the socio-political and economic life of large regions' Many merchants believed in the phrase England and the Netherlands- perhaps the most advanced European states during this period- established an equilibrium between central authority and commercial interest groups, providing them with the ability 'to mobilise resources on an unprecedented scale' The mutual benefits of compromise between government and mercantile interests influenced European legislation, for both English common law and European Roman law protected property rights. This removed some of the vulnerability of entrepreneurial nous and thus encouraged economic development. Such an attitude was enhanced by financial changes; In East Asian government monetary matters were controlled by individual rulers, whereas European financial institutions were independent both of government whims and the fortunes of individual merchants. The Bank of England provided independent checks on the state of the economy and concept of partnership came into fruition with the Dutch pioneering of a joint-stock company. As Van Zanden concludes 'social and political relationships in Western Europe appear to have been less hierarchical than in large parts of Asia' Repressive government in an increasingly global economy was not conducive to economic progress.