The Black Death of 1347 to 1352 and the subsequent outbreaks of the plague were 'the most devastating natural disasters ever to strike Europe' Although it is impossible to calculate the exact death toll of the Black Death, as there is limited evidence, 'to maintain that one European in three died... cannot be wildly far from the truth' As there were a number of social, economic and political changes that occurred around that time, the Black Death can be viewed as a turning point in the history of Europe; F. A. Gasquet believed it to have formed 'the real close of the Medieval period and the beginning of our Modern age' On the other hand, there are worries that too great a significance has been placed on the impact of the Black Death. Philip Ziegler, for example, argues that 'in the long run things would have followed the same course, even though there had never been a plague'
The Black Death had profound social effects. It wiped out an estimated one-third of the British population causing a massive labour shortage and inflation of wages. As a result, the 'poor had an increased self confidence' Although more money was being earned by workers, landowners attempted to ensure that their financial interests were safeguarded. This was the first time that politicians had to take account of people other than the upper classes; the lower classes were gaining influence. The social structure of Medieval Europe was also changed as the great landowners who had once held considerable power were now 'less able to impose their authority' On the continent, aristocrats were being replaced by rich merchants and financiers, who were the ones taking advantage of the increased incomes. These social changes were large steps towards the transformation of Europe into a capitalist civilization.
Thorold Rogers suggests that the ' Black Death was a stimulus towards... the disintegration of the manorial system' Villeins began to feel that their positions were unfair as they could see the high wages of those not bound to their lord by obligation. The 'scales were... tipped against the land owner' Laws such as the Statute of Labourers were passed to protect the landlord by checking increased wages and the free movement of labour. These laws were largely ignored. Landlords also tried to maintain power by stepping up the level of fines in their courts. As a result, 'relations... became more confrontational' In this way, it can be argued that the Black Death caused the Peasants' Revolt of 1381. As Ziegler maintains, 'if there had been no Black Death, tension and bitterness would never have risen by 1381 to the level that it did' The situation after the outbreak of the plague highlighted existing grievances of the peasants and showed up the flaws in the existing system.
On the social level, it is noted that 'the survivors were a hardier lot than those who had been taken by the plague' This can be related to the strengthening of marriage bonds, as the demographic catastrophe brought partners closer together. Also, because the disease was passed by contact, people who lived in the same area were more likely to survive, as those fleeing the plague spread it further. After the Black Death, Europe saw an increase in a more mobile population. Previously peasants were tied to their lands and were not allowed to move, but this changed after the Black Death, when 'labourers turned the tables on their lords' and sought work elsewhere, refusing to return to the manors of their birth. This shift in practice can be observed in the laws passed by the Statutes of Labourers, which aimed to check the free movement of labour
The time after the Black Death was ' a period of impressive technological achievement' As the population had decreased, labour costs were high which meant that great rewards were given to inventors of labour-saving devices. Also, with less demand for food there was more room for innovation and experimentation. The depression of the fifteenth century led to the development of the labour-saving, light, one-slit plough. Away from agriculture, there were advancements in other areas such as the invention of Johann Gutenberg's printing press in 1453. This replaced the large teams of monastic copyists whose numbers were decreased significantly during the Black Death.
In the political sphere, the Black Death had a great impact. The Medieval system based on vassalage was largely a success in the Middle Ages, but after the plague it began to breakdown as it could no longer meet the needs of the people. Kings, such as Edward III, had to acknowledge the 'increasing independent spirit of the people' Peasants began to challenge 'entrenched ideas of ascriptive feudalism by emphasizing rights over obligations' More people became landowners and many helped themselves at the expense of churches. Landlords had no 'legal compulsion' over those who worked the land after the Black Death. This had a knock on effect on the power of the rest of the nobility. With the lower classes enjoying new power, the Kings increased their authority and attempted to use their increased resources to gain more control.  The Church also suffered a blow after the Black Death. People 'increasingly rejected its dogmas' They lost faith in papal authority as they felt that the Church had abandoned them when they were in need. The Black Death gave rise to a new level of scepticism. In the past, it was accepted that disasters were God's will and prayers were said asking for forgiveness for sins. This did not happen during the Black Death, as people felt that it was not their fault. David Herlihy comments on the widespread realism of the period: 'they said less of God, and more of nature' This was in stark contrast to the period before the Black Death. The Church made 'little attempt to free itself from the scientific views which had grown up around it' Instead it started to use superstition to explain the plague. The Church also had to face the fact that many of its members, such as bishops, abbots and priests, had died from the plague. This meant that many traditions originating from its members were lost and people no longer had to pledge their assets to the Church on death.
The effects of the Black Death on the church were great. There was a decrease in pilgrims, which meant a fall in the funds of religious institutions and also a decrease in 'jury services, tithes, bequests and fines' Parsons were unimpressive and 'ecclesiastical discipline slackened' There was a decrease in church attendance, besides special religious services. For example, in the years before 1340, at least 24,000 people flocked to Tournai cathedral on Good Friday. Only 800 was this number present in 1350.
There were a number of social changes that arose from the Black Death. The plague 'must have killed in some areas almost everyone' Inevitably, this led to disruption of families, especially in the towns where extended families often lived together. This had an effect on the social structure of the family; the vital family continuity was destroyed as people moved into their positions of power without the support of a family or mentors who had risen before them. As a result, there was a breakdown in traditional values and morality. This created a shock; one of the basic safety nets of society had been taken away. People were understandably fearful of death and these feelings were reflected in the religious popular works such as Piers Plowman. They were no longer comforted by the thought of redemption of mankind, but instead worried about their own mortality. This meant that people became increasingly self-centred; their thoughts were focused on themselves and nobody else. As Ziegler remarks, 'man became his own salvation' People focused on other, more attainable goals such as money, pleasure and individual advancement. The greatest impact of the Black Death may have been its ' profound psychological effects' on the people.
Conclusion
A number of the effects of the Black Death were only short term and evened out after a few years. For example, inflation of agricultural produce after the Black Death subsided and prices regained their previous levels. Wages also fell in a few years back to more usual levels Although there were a number of technological advancements after the Black Death, many of the major breakthroughs of the time came before the plague such as windmills and complex field systems in agriculture and developments in wool and silk manufacture Gutenberg's printing press was an advancement that came as a result of the population shortage after the Black Death; however, printing did not really become popular until the 1470s when the population was increasing. Also, the most important centers of printing were Venice, Rome and the Southern German cities where there was the fastest demographic growth. This suggests that the Black Death did not have a great impact on the technological advancements of the time.
The Black Death did, however, have a number of long-term effects on the social structure of Europe. In certain areas of England, for example, there were longer terms changes to the inheritance of property. Before the plague, before a son inherited from his father he was expected to acquire a share of the property of the mother's family as well. After the Black Death this matter was ignored and the rules of primogeniture- inheritance by the oldest son- were widely adopted. The concept of family changed due to the Black Death as people were less likely to marry and have large families. Surplus male population was absorbed into the army and private life became more self centered as it was no longer necessary for sons to stay at home to help with the family business. Maybe due to greater freedom, as well as the religious and economic changes of the time, there was a greater focus on individuality and personal accomplishments.
There have been a number of different interpretations on how significant an impact the Black Death had on the history of Europe. The population and commercialization of Europe was already in decline and 'continued deterioration... would have been likely, even if... [the Black Death] had never occurred' It was a catalyst for events such as the Peasant's Revolt, the Reformation and the fall of manorialism, but was not a direct cause. It appears that 'the Black Death did not initiate any major social or economic trends but it accelerated and modified- sometimes drastically- those which already existed'