This study investigated whether first year university females had significantly more disordered eating than a control group of non-university females. It was hypothesised that low self esteem as a result of leaving home for the first time, and having to integrate a new peer group would be the cause of this. Questionnaires were used to measure participants eating behaviour, body shape satisfaction and self esteem. Attitudes towards the new peer group were measured using specific questions on the self esteem questionnaire. It was found that the first year students did have significantly more disordered eating than the control group, although having low self esteem and integrating a new peer group were not significant causes of this. It may be that low self esteem and having to integrate a new peer group play a part in increasing eating deviancy in first year students, although these may not have been shown to be significant because they combine with other factors associated with university life such as stress and depression. It was clearly found, however, that first year females have far more problems with their eating than females who are not at university.
Eating disorders are becoming an increasing problem. The concept of the thin body ideal is being internalised through the social setting and causing more people, particularly adolescent females, to resort to severe dieting techniques (Markham, Thompson, Bowling, 2005). Unhealthy eating attitudes are an immensely important area of research as it has been shown that up to 20% of young women participate in intense dieting practices at some point in their lives (Kurth, Krahn, Nain and Drewnowski, 1995). Eating disorders are an issue affecting millions of people worldwide, with 3.4% of the population having a diagnosis (Kjelsan, Bjornstrom and Gotestom, 2004). It is likely the incidence rate for eating disorders is higher than this, although many people suffering from them deny the problem and therefore do not seek diagnosis or treatment. Research in this area is particularly important as it appears that more and more people are developing the disorders and concealing them. Once the causes for eating disorders have been fully investigated it may be possible to accurately identify individuals who are predisposed to suffer with their eating behaviour.
There are many factors which may trigger an eating disorder. Lieberman, Gauvin, Bukowski and White (2001) found significant causes to be peer pressure to be thin, social reinforcement and body related teasing. They present the argument that as peer relations are very important in adolescence, if the social group values the thin body ideal highly then individuals aspire to achieve this, even through deviant eating patterns. In addition to this Blowers, Loxton, Grady-Flesser and Dawe (2003) found that the media plays an important role in the internalisation of the thin body ideal and increasing body dissatisfaction, and therefore, contributing to the development of eating disorders. These can be considered social influences over eating behaviour and are directly linked to how the individual perceives themselves in relation to others. This appears to be a highly influential factor for eating pathology because if a person's evaluation of their body does not meet the real or imagined body ideal set by peers, or by the media, then deviant eating behaviour seems to be the coping technique adopted to achieve what is believed to be desirable (Gordon, 1990).
On the other hand there are internal causes of eating disorders which mean that individuals are more predisposed to disordered eating than others. It has been shown that a primary issue associated with an eating disorder is that they are biological based (Arumugham, Charpentier, Poulton, 2000). Human beings have an innate predisposition to over eat and become obese, which is caused by genetic make up (Garlund, Emmerson, van Hemmen, 2000). This means it is likely that individuals who are more prone to this trait will have a physiological need to try and prevent themselves from becoming overweight by resorting to extreme dieting techniques (Arumugham et al, 2000). It also appears that some individuals have a defence mechanism within themselves which tries to protect against social pain. Those under stress and feeling helpless, tend to attempt to make this feeling manageable and protect themselves from it socially by being thin (Gordon, 1990). Therefore it is likely that internal causes of eating pathology occur more in those who find life situations such as moving away from home, or having to provide an abundant performance for university course work, particularly stressful. This decreases their ability to cope
The present study is concerned with investigating the combination of both internal and external factors within a particularly vulnerable group of individuals, first year university students. Moving away from home for the first time is one of the most stressful life changes a person will ever have to adjust to (Seligman, Walker, Rosenhan, 2001). This study intends to investigate whether eating behaviours become more deviant during the first year of living away from home at university compared to a control group of non-university participants. Moving into halls of residence at university entails integration into a new peer group, which may heighten feelings of insecurity and low self esteem. It has already been shown that low self esteem is a significant contributor to disordered eating behaviour, and this may combine with students seeking the thin body ideal in order to successfully integrate with their new group of friends. When adolescent girls are beginning new friendships they believe it is important to be thin, and compare themselves to other members of the group (Guendouzi, 2004). Attainment of the thin body ideal was also found to be a common topic of conversation (Guendouzi, 2004). This is particularly important when investigating the effect integration of a new peer group has on eating behaviour as it is likely that when girls first start university and are making new friendships, this is a safe topic of conversation as body concerns an issue many girls have as a common ground, which may increase pressure to be thin.
It is notable that males also suffer with eating disorders. However it is predominantly young females who are affected. This is why females are the only gender being used in this study, as the results will be far more reliable due to the high prevalence rate amongst us. It is believed however that this is not simply because they are more prone to the disorder, but that males are simply more inclined to hide their problems. Because of the social responses which eating disorders have, men are likely to be more concealed about their condition as most eating behaviour issues appear to be associated with femininity (McLaren et al, 2001). Research on this topic is also important because the age groups used for previous studies have been narrow.
In order to establish the role low self-esteem and having to integrate a new peer group has to play in fuelling eating deviancy, the present study used a between subjects design. It explored whether first year university females had significantly more disordered eating than a control group of non university females of the same age. Two universities were recruited for the experimental group: Queen Mary and the Italia Conti Academy of Theatre Arts. As the University already sets up a peer group for their students a control group living in the local area was not used for the purpose of the experiment. The control group were females of the same age as the experimental group recruited from a university open day. This approach was taken as it was felt participants would be more likely to story accurately when responding to questionnaires on eating habits, body satisfaction and self esteem as they were not aware of the aims of the study.
METHOD  PARTICIPANTS  The participants in the study were 23 first year female students aged 18-19 years, and 23 control females aged 18-19 years. Subjects for the experimental group were selected from two different university campuses, one in Bolton and one in London. The London campus was a performing arts university and the Bolton campus was a non performing arts university. Selecting university students from possibly two different backgrounds was important to make sure there was no response bias present. There was an almost even split between the number of participants from the two universities, with 11 participants from Bolton and London respectively.  Controls were matched to the experimentals with regards to age, gender, race and location. The closest university to the control group was Liverpool university so it provided a good match of socio-economic standing and the age group for the experimentals without being too close geographically. Control participants were asked at the beginning of the study to state whether they liked very much or had been to either Bolton or London university, and if they had been simply to visit or if they knew current students from either of the universities. All controls stated they had not been to either university and none knew current students, which was reassuring that no main effects of the university were present due to previous visits or personal convictions.  MATERIALS  To measure behaviour and attitudes to eating, body shape, and self-esteem / peer group influences the Eating Attitude Test (EAT), the Body Shape Questionnaire (BSQ), and a revised version of the Self-Esteem Rating Scale (SERS) were used. The EAT was predominated by participants' evaluation of food and their thoughts on their eating behaviour (Garner, Olmsted and Polivy, 1983). The BSQ was employed to measure
The graph below compares the means and standard deviations for the experimental group, control group, and the normative means for the three dependant variables; EAT, BSQ and SERS (for a table of exact findings see appendix).
It can immediately be seen from this that there are higher levels of eating deviancy and body shape dissatisfaction for the experimental group although the control group have slightly lower levels of self esteem.
When a MANOVA for the experimental and control group was conducted to test whether there were any significant differences, it was found that the Wilks' Lambda of 0.939 was significant for the dependant variables: A Bonferroni adjusted significance level for the MANOVA declared 0.17 was used ( It was not necessary to use a significance level of 0.05 to observe the difference between the two groups, as the Bonferroni reduction was appropriate.
There was also a significant main effect for EAT only.
The revised version of the Self Esteem Rating Scale was created to measure any difference between the control and experimental groups for self esteem regarding their new peer group by taking two questions from the SERS; two questions from the Social Avoidance and Distress scale (Watson, Friend and Rudolph, 2006), and four questions were written specifically for this study. On the experimental group only a t test between the revised measure and the control measure showed no significant difference between the groups. This suggests that the experimental group did not feel any more insecure with their "new friends" than the control group did with "others". The reliability for the revised measure was even higher than the SERS, suggesting that the addition of these specific questions produced reliable results. The Cronbach alpha for the revised measure was 0.82 and the Cronbach alpha for SERS was 0.76, showing the revised measure had a higher reliability in this study. When the results for the dependant variables were compared against the established normative means specified by
The data for the experimental and control group were compared to the known normative means. The comparison showed that for both EAT and SERS the experimental and control group had significantly lower scores than the normative means given by Nugent and Thomas (1993) (p<0.001). Therefore, there was a significant difference between the means for both EAT and SERS for the experimental group and the normative means. For BSQ there was a difference between the experimental and control groups and the normative mean given by Cooper et al (1987) (p<0.001). Therefore, for BSQ there was also a significant difference between the means for the experimental group and the normative mean.
Pearson's product moment correlation was used to correlate scores for all three dependant variables (see table 1 in the appendix).  For the experimental group scores for EAT and BSQ showed a small negative correlation with . 344 and 8.9% shared variance. This suggests that there is a small relationship between body dissatisfaction and eating deviancy. Contrary to this, for the control group there was a non significant relationship between EAT and BSQ, with only 0.2% shared variance between the two. This suggests that levels of body dissatisfaction may contribute more to disordered eating patterns for the experimental group than for the control group.
The research question was; do first year university students have significantly more disordered eating than a control group of non-university participants? It can be said with confidence that yes, they do have significantly more disordered eating than the control group. This was established by the one way between subjects MANOVA. From comparing the mean scores it was clear that the experimental group was more eating disordered, and by using a Bonferroni adjusted level of 0.17 a significant difference between the means was established. This is a substantial finding as it has been illustrated that first year university girls have substantially more disorders than those not at university.
The most general conclusion which can be drawn from the MANOVA is that there was an overall significance between the experimental and control group on the three dependant variables; scores for EAT, BSQ and SERS. There was however only a significant main effect for EAT, which means that there was only a significant difference between the groups in their eating behaviour and not in their self-esteem levels or body shape dissatisfaction. When an independent samples t-test was conducted between the control and experimental group for the revised measure of SERS, where only questionnaires relating to the new peer group were included, there was still no significant difference between the two. This suggests that experimental participants had no more self esteem issues regarding their "new friends" than control participants had with "others".
The results show then, that first year university students do have significantly more disordered eating than a control group of matched aged non university students, although having to integrate a new peer group and low self esteem are not significant causes of this. This may be because low self esteem and having to integrate a new peer group combine with other factors associated with university life such as stress and depression, which were not measured in this study. It appears then although peers have an influence over body image and dieting behaviour, that it is not necessarily the case that being placed in a new peer group causes disordered eating behaviour, although it should not be underestimated as a contributing variable. It is also advantageous to take into account the fact that educational level is a significant factor in body satisfaction, with girls with higher educational attainments being more satisfied with their bodies (Swami, 2005). The experimental group only had university aged first year students. It may be profitable to compare this group with a group of same aged non university goers in future research. This would give more scope to assess whether being at university is the sole cause for the significant difference in disordered eating levels as opposed to the levels of educational attainment. It is also important to consider the environment in which data was collected. For the experimental group, data was collected from Birmingham City University, although the course area was not specified on the questionnaires. As Birmingham City University was used it may be that the students who completed the questionnaires were from area studies, as this is the predominant subject studied at this university. Area studies
It can be seen that the hypothesis that first year university students would have significantly more deviant eating behaviour than a control group of matched age non university participants was correct. The experimental group scored significantly higher on the EAT than the control group. It appears that the hypothesis concerning self esteem and peer group influence over eating behaviour was incorrect however. It did not prove to be significant with the MANOVA and the independent samples t test investigating the influence of new friends on self esteem also proved to be non significant.
The findings from the one-way between-subjects MANOVA support the original hypothesis in that first year university students do have significantly more disordered eating than the control group of non-university participants. This is illustrated with the significant main effect for EAT with the experimental group having higher scores for deviant eating behaviour. These results seem to reinforce the suggestion that first year university students have higher levels of disordered eating than non university participants and that this is caused by factors associated with integrating into a new peer group and low self-esteem.
The results show that first year university students do have significantly more disordered eating behaviours than their non-university counterparts. Integrating a new peer group and having low self esteem did not, however, prove to be significant. It is likely that low self esteem and having to integrate a new peer group absolutely play a part in triggering disordered eating in first year students, although these were not shown to be significant due to them joining with other factors such as depression and stress which are associated with university life.
The results of this study showed that first year university females do have significantly more disordered eating than a matched age control group of non-university females. Low self esteem and integrating a new peer group were not significant causes of this. It may be that low self esteem and having to integrate a new peer group might still play a part in increasing eating deviancy in first year students, although these may not have been shown to be significant because they combine with other factors associated with university life such as stress and depression. It is clear however that first year females have far more problems with their eating than females who are not at university.
It may be therefore that what this study shows is that moving away from home for the first time, and having to integrate a new peer group, may not be cause for disordered eating pattern, but that it acts to increase existing problems individuals may already have. This is suggested by the moderate negative correlation between EAT and SERS (19.98% shared variance, r = -0.44) for the experimental group. This may show that individuals already have low self esteem, which does contribute to disordered eating behaviours, although it may be that moving away from home heightens this feeling and as a result increases the disordered eating.
Another factor which may contribute to first year students having significantly more disordered eating than their control group involves the aspects which university brings. Firstly university entails leaving home, sometimes for the first time, and living without parental supervision. This may lead to more stress, depression and eventually disordered eating when teenagers are suddenly faced with the responsibility and independence of living away from home. Vanderlinden et al (2001) found that about 30% of students were suffering with depression, and that disordered on or more eating attitudes are eight times more likely in those with depression. It may be that university simply highlights already existing tendencies, or factors before university, which individuals are not even aware of, and resort to disordered eating as a coping technique when depression or stress peaks. University may, in some cases, lead to the development of disordered eating, but it is likely that the individuals already had easier tendencies to develop these patterns and that living away from home provides an opportunity to do this. University also entails a lack of structure and increase in freedom. For those with disordered eating patterns, there are no constraints or rules which may lead individuals to abusing this freedom and perpetuating their disordered patterns (Gordon, 1990).
When the dependant variables were correlated it was apparent that there was a medium to high level correlation between the scores for EAT and SERS for the experimental group, although not for the control group. This shows that high deviant eating behaviour correlates more strongly with low self esteem for the experimental group. It appears that this may be a contributing factor as to why the first year students have more deviant eating behaviours than the control group, although it cannot be seen as a significant factor without further research into the role low self-esteem plays in disordered eating.
The use of questionnaires did also prove a problem as response bias may have occurred. It is likely that participants gave socially desirable answers in order to appear normal and to avoid prejudice. This type of bias may have prevented some participants from giving their true opinions or behaviours making the results less generalisable. Another limitation of this study was the restriction of university chosen. Although the Italia Conti Academy is a respected institution, it may be advantaged as it is a performing arts academy. The type of students it attracts may be very different to students of a non performing arts undergraduate. It may clearly affect the overall results of the experiment.
The format of the questionnaires may also have proved a problem. To increase reliability and validity three established questionnaires were used to create one. The main problem here is that all three used a slightly different scale. This may have caused confusion for participants, who might have used the wrong scales whilst answering questions. Experimental care was however taken by explaining in prose form at the beginning of each questionnaire that a different scale was being used for each section. The scales were also repeated every time questions continued onto a new page so participants would not have to rely on memory to use the scales. Human error may however have meant some participants may have used the wrong scale for the questionnaires. Other issues may have influenced results such as whether participants had a boyfriend at university. This may have increased self esteem levels and reduced the effect a new peer group may have had over individuals who had boyfriends. Also the distance from home participants were may have had an effect. Participants living closer to the university may not have had such low self esteem as they are still relatively near to their parents. In further research it may be beneficial to account for these individual factors.