Popularity is an extremely difficult concept to measure as popularity is variable across cultures and ages. Characteristics defining a child as popular at the age of 8 may not be the same characteristics which define a child as popular at 14. Another problem arises distinguishing friendship from popularity. A child may be perceived as unpopular but still have a few close friends, and it is important to consider this when looking at psychological development because popularity is multi-faceted as opposed to one dimensional. It has been shown that unpopular children are more likely to have psychological difficulties such as schizophrenia, anxiety disorders, mood disorders and criminal behaviour (Kupersmidt, Coie and Dodge, 1990). Because of this, an important issue when looking at the effect of popularity on psychological development is cause and effect. This issue is covered extensively in the essay as it is valuable, yet difficult, to try and determine whether being unpopular causes problems with psychological development, or whether underlying psychological difficulties cause the child to behave inappropriately and become unpopular.
The effects of popularity on psychological development vary with age and situation. To simplify the inquiry however it will be looked at with an age range of 8 - 14. This age range was chosen because it is generally accepted that children form their personality and behaviour patterns within this period and therefore it is possible to look at the implications popularity plays on this process and whether it is causal for the psychological development of the child. Popularity within this range does not typically equate to actual number of friends the child has, for example, Maccoby and Jackling (1992) state that popularity is not considered by the number of friends a child possesses, but is more to do with the level of acceptance by groups the child is associated with, particularly same sex groups. This has implications when looking are popularity and psychological development as if a child has many friends but is still rejected, then it is likely to be even more detrimental to their psychological development.
It has been found by Coie and Dodge (1983) (as cited in Asher, 1990) that rejection is a stable process and once you have been rejected you are likely to stay rejected for at least the next five years. This is why it is important to look at the implications for this on the child's psychological development as it is likely the child will remain in their rejected situation until at least adulthood. An important aspect to consider with respect to this is labelling theory and the self fulfilling prophecy. When cause and effect are taken into account a child may remain unpopular because they believe themselves to be unpopular and therefore act in a way appropriate to the label they have been given. Also children are very aware of building alliances to secure their own popularity and if one child is labelled undesirable other children may not want to be associated with the labelled child thus securing their own alliances and popularity.
This may account for why children remain unpopular but it does not explain why the child may become unpopular or undesirable in the first place. One possible reason causing a child to be unpopular may be due to them having an autistic spectrum disorder (Hobson, 1995). Unfortunately many of the characteristics displayed by unpopular children are also displayed by children suffering from an autistic spectrum disorder such as Autism or Asberger's Syndrome. Children who are unpopular tend to only view situations from their own perspective, do not value others opinions and cannot empathise with their peers (Dekovic et al, 1994). Autism is a disorder where it is believed children lack a "Theory of Mind". This means that they find it very hard to see the world from any perspective but their own and fail to understand others emotions or social cues (Hobson, 1995). This may lead to the child becoming unpopular as perspective seeing is essential to being popular as are the communication and cognitive skills that someone with autism may lack. This is one reason a child may become unpopular as autism affects 5 in every 10,000 children (Hobson, 1995). If autism is not diagnosed until the later years the child will be in main stream education and more than likely be rejected by peers and possibly suffer the psychological problems associated with rejection which will be discussed later.
Another cause for a child being unpopular is associated with the family (Henggeler, Edwards, Cohen and Summerville, 1991). The majority of children spend their first few years learning from their parents so it is not surprising that these early years contribute to the child's personality and whether they become popular or unpopular. Ainsworth and Wittig (1969) (as cited in Henggeler et al, 1991) investigated types of attachment between mother and infant. They identified three types of attachment as these have been investigated with regards to child's future popularity. Vandell and Wilson (1987) (as cited in Henggeler et al 1991) found that children who are securely attached become more popular than those who are not securely attached and have more positive peer interactions. This is likely to be because these children have a secure base from which to explore from and feel confident in themselves to make social advances, knowing that they have support. This inner feeling of security may facilitate confidence and an interpersonal family may produce interactional skills.
To support this MacDonald (1987) (as cited in Henggeler, 1991) found that preschool boys who had been assessed as being "rejected" had parents who were less interpersonally responsive and were less emotionally positive. These children were more likely to have been considered to have had an attachment type of anxious avoidant or anxious resistant. If child had this attachment type then they will not have had a secure base from which to explore from and particularly anxious resistant children would have been anxious at leaving the caregiver and facilitating early social relationships.
This indicates that the cause of the child being unpopular may be due to the type of child the parent is introducing to the world. A securely attached child is likely to have a secure base and experience to which they can use in their peer encounters, however an anxious or avoidant child may have difficulties forming peer relationships as they will not be secure enough to do this. The important factor here however is that the attachment with the parent does not guarantee popularity. It is the type of child the parent is introducing which does, as a securely attached child is likely to be confident and have a secure enough base to explore and make social advances. This does start from the family however and if the child has not had the opportunity to learn the important cognitive and social skills then it is unlikely they will find socialising and making friends and hence being popular easy.
Piaget (as cited in Rubin, LeMare and Lollis, 1990) offers another environmental explanation as to why some children may be more popular than others. He suggests that children who become popular have successfully negotiated mutually engendered behaviours. Because young children are egocentric to learn how to interact and become socially efficient they need to lose the belief that the world centres around them and develop a theory of mind (as cited in Rubin, 1990). Early play and reciprocal friendship allow perspective taking skills and prosocial behaviours to develop, which are important skills to be popular and socially accepted (as cited in Rubin, 1990). This has implications for children who do not have the opportunity to socialise at an early age as may not completely abolish the notion of egocentrism. It also means important cognitive and social skills are not being developed. This is supported by the fact that Dekovic and Gerris (1994) found that rejected children demonstrated more egocentric, selfish behaviours This offers a suggestion as to why children may not exhibit prosocial behaviour but it still does not explicitly offer a cause. Is it opportunity that prevents early socialisation, and if so should this just not occur at preschool, or is it personality which prevents early socialisation or is it attachment type and not feeling secure enough to socialise.
Having looked at many different factors which may cause unpopularity and the differences between rejected and neglected there is now the issue of psychological development to cover. It is important to consider here the implications of being sufficiently unpopular to also be considered "rejected" as this appears to have the more extreme implications for psychological development. It has been suggested that popular children tend to receive more positive reinforcement, which has implications for self esteem and psychological development (Kupersmidt et al, 1990). If this is not received then a child may struggle to keep up positive interpersonal relationships and friendships and therefore experiences increased loneliness, social isolation and guilt, which all have obvious implications for psychological development (Kupersmidt et al, 1990). Besides these possible issues it has also been suggested that unpopular children may not receive positive reinforcement stating that their's is insufficient or incorrect behaviour. This obviously has implications and could lead to behaviour which further alienates them from social groups and increases their unpopularity (Kupersmidt et al, 1990). It is important to consider that this can lead to self fulfilling prophecy as previously stated. If a child believes they are not behaving correctly then they may continue to not behave correctly as they are convinced that the behaviour is wrong. The differences between rejected and neglected appear to be important when looking at psychological development. Not only due to the difference in being actively disliked and not, but also because of the type of problems that are associated with rejection and neglect. Being rejected leads to external problems such as aggression, hostile arguments and violence (Asher, 1990). It has been found that the absence of friends results in the child compensating by seeking approval through external sources, which can increase the problem with external aggression and hostility (Kupersmidt et al, 1990). This is obviously of importance in terms of psychological development as it can lead to criminal behaviour, although again it is emotion to decide whether the criminal behaviour was a cause of rejection or a symptom of rejection. If it is a cause then there are other elements to look into such as social learning theory etc.
The neglected type of unpopular child presents a different outlook. These children appear to struggle to build relationships with their peers and tend to lack the confidence and communication skills to do so (Asher, 1990). There has been some research that links these children to learning and medical disabilities (Asher, 1990). These children tend to be more vocal in their studies (Grusec1992) and have been observed to have learning difficulties in both children and adults (Anderson and Adams 1991) (as cited in Asher, 1990). This knowledge would suggest that these children may require more external aid in learning than those who were popular and this consequently may be why unpopular children have been found to have lower self esteem (Kupersmidt et al, 1990). This in itself though does not causes psychological problems but does cause isolation and the fear of isolation which can have implications on a child's mental health.  The neglected type of unpopular child also appears to be more likely to have psychological disorders such as anxiety disorders, mood disorders and later in life substance abuse (Kupersmidt et al, 1990). These children appear to suffer from more psychological difficulties due to the fact that they do not have the support system of a friend or family to whom they can talk or to offer reassurance when needed. They tend to be lonely (Grusec, 1992) and have difficulty talking to peers. It has been suggested that these children suffer from a lack of supportive positive experiences (Grusec, 1992). This again may be related to lack of reciprocal friendships and social learning opportunities. It would appear that these psychological difficulties are caused by a lack of opportunity to learn prosocial skills and rejective behaviour meaning these children have difficulty in establishing relationships and sustaining them and become isolated but not necessarily for any other reason other than the fact that they are disabled in social interaction. Consequently because of this they become lonely and are more likely to developed psychological difficulties.
This may have implications for female more than males as it has been suggested by a number of authors that females are more likely to become depressed because of lack of friends due to the importance girls place on friendships (as cited in Asher, 1990). This brings attention to evolutionary driven gender differences. Hir sch (1974) (as cited in David, 1990) suggests that females are the ones who invest the most in relationships because of the impact they have on survival and reproductive success, as well as the important role of attachments in development of the child. This may mean girls may be more sensitive to social rejection and therefore more likely to suffer from depression and other psychological difficulties come adolescence. This is especially important to take into account because the rate of depression in girls between the ages of 10 and 12 is two to three times that of boys and is likely to continue throughout adulthood. (David, 1990).
In conclusion there could be many factors effecting whether a child turns out to be popular or unpopular. The majority however seem to ignore the child's actual personality which probably plays a large role. There is little doubt however that factors such as attachment type and early experiences with reciprocal friendships are valuable in learning the necessary skills to socialise and which therefore give you an increased chance of being popular and having friends. It has been shown that lack of friends or being unpopular may lead to problems with psychological development and these seem to be more extreme with rejected rather than neglected children. There is plenty still to discover however regarding whether being unpopular causes psychological problems, or the psychological problems are already there and cause unpopularity. It would appear from the conclusions made in this essay that it is a likely combination of the two.