The development of feminist thought and action in Japan is distinct from that of its emergence in the West, more specifically within the United States and Britain. Though influenced by Western politics, the development of feminism in Japan was also initiated by numerous other social and political factors that affected the political climate at that specific time and place. Adherence to Confucian ideologies severely restricted women within Japanese society, as well as subordinating the working classes and those not owning property. A growing political awareness and imperialist competition later led to the struggle for social reform, of which women were arguably at the forefront. This essay will deal with such social and political factors as these to account for the development of feminism in Japan.
Beginning with the Meiji period (1868-1912), it is clear that several factors, concerning education, industry and state structure, facilitated the development of feminism in Japan. During this period, the ruling elite was increasingly conscious of Japan's place within the international community and as such adopted a form of imperialism and nation-building in order to keep up with Western capitalism and challenge its political superiority in the global market. Constructive state intervention was a key factor in achieving economic growth and bolstering an economic consciousness, evidenced in the establishment of a national education system and also the gradual popularisation of constitutionalism, or, The notion of 'enlightenment', a growing phenomenon under discussion by intellectuals, significantly affected Japan's position as a political power. By the beginning of the twentieth century, there was a growing awareness of Japan's socio-economic oppression at the hands of Western powers and by supporting women's rights as advocated by Buddhism and Christianity, intellectuals such as Yanagita Kunio believed this could be rectified. This rapidly Increasing consciousness led to the formulating of the 'women's problem', similar to the notion of the 'woman question' prevalent in Europe at the time, from which The Sh muk y kai, a literary society embracing middle class members, focused extensively on the 'woman's problem'. Many viewed 'education, reform of the family and improved employment opportunities for women [as] essential to national progress'. A rise in the birth rate was also seen as a priority which, if addressed by Female suffrage was, by and large, viewed as a significant factor in the women's struggle for liberation. The restriction of contraception to only married couples, partly due to the American occupation's sexual code in 1945, meant there was reduced control over contraception, abortion and prostitution, all of which had fuelled the feminist movement in Japan. To some extent, this saw 'the state [become] a catalyst in transforming the lives of Japanese women'.
This production of a compliant and obedient female model of behaviour reflected the nationalist Japanese sentiment at the time for increased strength as a nation. Changes in governmental ideology were taking place in order for Japan to compete with the West as a powerful imperial nation and political programme of 'women's civilisation' emerged. It was declared via various governmental documents and speeches that the civilising of women was necessary in order for Japan to be seen as a civilised nation itself, in line with notions of Westernisation and imperialism. Social and domestic life was thus publicised as the woman's domain whereas the public domain of politics and industrialisation was given over to men. This reinforced the Confucian and the accepted notions of woman's role; though the woman was no longer expected to be solely domestic, she was not to be involved in any political decisions.
The Women's Reform Movement, set up in 1871, was founded with the aim of renegotiating the roles and rights of women, establishing itself with obvious ties to Western cultures. This was a crucial point in the struggle for women's liberation in Japan as women could now begin to consider their own individual identities and, more importantly, societal roles. With this, the traditional ideal of womanhood began to be called into question. One major barrier to the social reform of women was their lack of education. Though it had gained more importance with the implementation of a more liberal form of government, the majority of Japanese women were denied access to education beyond elementary level as this was seen to be
way in which the subordination of women could be challenged, yet did not always transfer successfully to greater political action. An education in Western ideologies was also believed by many as the only means for Japan to become a civilised and powerful nation and was included as a principal goal within the 1889 Educational law. However, this newly-adopted western educational system turned out to favour men over women by alienating the cultural values of gender equality that had been the norm previously. Therefore, although the educational system was intended to foster social mobility, it 'effectively disadvantaged women.' The dispute between modernity and tradition was fiercely debated by proponents of both sides. The introduction of industrialisation and modernisation contained inherent contradictions, potentially offering more autonomy yet also providing new ways in which it could be restricted. This explains the dilemma many women saw themselves in and their eventual organisation; the move from traditional to modern concepts of thought led to a profoundly increased level of political awareness. The struggle for progress without subordinating the position of women inspired many women, particularly intellectuals, to take the first steps towards formally organised feminist groups.
The groundwork for the development of feminism was therefore set, however further strands to the narrative began to emerge. In Japan, much debate over the change of the social order took place, with many focusing on the potential of imperialism to offer an upgraded version of 'colonial modernity', This concept of 'colonial modernity' inspired further notions of modern Japanese womanhood that sought to challenge the traditional role of the Japanese woman as a homemaker and mother. They instead sought to take on 'modern' traits such as education and taking up employment. Rena Kato argued that 'modern womanhood provided Japanese women with an opportunity to lay claim to equality with men, regardless of their class and status background
Though imperialism influenced Japan, there was also competition and challenge from within, as well as from external actors. This was based largely on the increased political awareness throughout the population, which consequently meant that 'increasingly complex and diverse forms of pressure from below propelled changes in the government too'. The Japanese belief that people were 'the foundation of the country' was reinforced through increased urbanization and the strength of the 'Put Yourself in Their Shoes' movement. This placed pressure on the state to reform in order to avoid change from occurring due to revolution. Consequently, the Meiji government was forced to Liberalise, and this ultimately led to the decreased authority of traditional patriarchs and the initiation of women's liberation. Furthermore, the subsequent imperialism and the success of victories such as the Sino-Japanese War of 1894-95 aided the cause of women, as it meant that the government was more likely to gain legitimacy from liberal reforms and was open to further domestication.
Ultimately, it can be seen that a varied combination of changing social and political factors led to the development of feminism in Japan. Through increased political awareness and changing structures within the government, women were able to challenge their position for the first time. In the national struggle for increased economic and military power, gender identities were redefined in order to benefit the state. Women were arguably used in this process before being liberated themselves. Thereby, 'in the process of refusing subordinate status [as a nation], Japan constructed a new womanhood as a demonstration of its equality with the West and as a means of proving its civilised status'.