The Civil War in Russia is often considered as a fight between Reds and Whites. However, many recent historians, such as Radkey, consider the Bolsheviks versus the Greens, a popular movement led by the peasants, as the main Civil War in Russia. How valid is this claim?
Radkey's claim is valid. The Civil War in Russia between the Reds and Whites was ultimately overshadowed by the struggle between the Bolsheviks and the Greens, a popular movement led by the peasants. The Bolsheviks relied on workers to run production and the railways, many of whom were members of the Greens, meaning they could revolt and cause serious damage to the Reds. The Greens consisted of anarchists, peasants, workers and nationalists and often revolted to gain political freedom, food and more control of their land. They would enlist the aid of soldiers for their cause. The Bolsheviks attempted to introduce the New Economic Policy in order to reduce the peasant uprisings and although it failed, it illustrates the power of the popular movement. The Bolsheviks relied on propaganda to keep the people of Russia in line however there were still many strikes and protests indicating the threat posed by the Greens was strong. The Bolsheviks had to make changes to appease the people, showing the war between the Bolsheviks and the peasants was a struggle against popular opinion. The White Army, although powerful, was ultimately divided and poorly organised and lacked the communication network the Reds had. A victory against the Greens was unlikely and it was the threat of popular opinion that gave the Reds control over the people of Russia after defeating the White Army.
Much of the Bolshevik strength lay in the land it held. The Reds held highly populated areas, including industrial Petrograd, which they could use for military equipment production and land where railways were already laid, making communication between troops easier. Conversely, the Whites were dispersed across Russia. However, the Reds relied on workers for production and railways, many of whom were members of the Greens. Therefore the Greens could pose a serious threat to the Bolsheviks if they revolted in these areas.
The Green movement was made up of mainly peasants. Some Bolsheviks, particularly Trotsky, supported the Greens and wanted to improve the ill-treatment of the peasants, however, Lenin's view of the peasantry was 'the labour of the peasants was necessary and that rebellion was to be crushed." War Communism was institutionalised in July 1918, designed to crush and absorb the popular movement into the Bolshevik party. Assessing the strength of the popular movement is very difficult, as often the peasants who joined it did not state a clear aim. Kerensky argued that 'the chief front of the civil war was no longer that of the Reds against the Whites but between the Leninist-Bolsheviks and the peasantry.'
Let us say goodbye to the old and welcome in the new Be it right, be it wrong, let us be brave  We will build zemstvo hospitals where peasants will heal We will have our own schools to teach our own children.
Sometimes the Greens would join the Reds to fight the Whites or vice-versa, but this was always for their own gain. Revisionist historians hold the view that
This demonstrates the strength of this popular movement, and how dangerous it was for the Bolsheviks. The Greens imposed a wartime structure upon the rural districts of Russia, by having their own committees and national armies. Things were worse for the Bolsheviks because there were Red Forest Brothers, peasants who had willingly entered the Red Army but still adhered to the cause of the Greens, thus weakening the Reds from the inside. The Greens had numerous spokesmen, such as the SR's, who had a huge following and could manipulate the people to oppose the Bolsheviks.
It is true to say that the Civil War was not fought against the Whites only, but rather the struggle was with the Greens. They were the main threat to the Bolsheviks because of their sheer numbers, familiarity with the land and the political support. The Greens had spontaneous uprisings and rised in many of the cities, they managed to obtain arms and supplies and could fight the Bolsheviks for their own cause. The Reds had a lot of tactics, such as propaganda and military power, which were effective against the Whites, but did not work against the Greens. The Reds had to make concessions, introduce the NEP and there was much fighting between 1920 and 1921, especially in the countryside which had been affected by War Communism, before they were successful against the Greens. The Greens reject any Bolshevik power and wanted a democratic republic run by their own. Radkey says 'the greatest threat to the stability of the Soviet state after the defeat of the White forces came from the social revolution of the people." Therefore, the Civil War was not just Reds and Whites, but Reds and Greens and the terms in which it was fought changed dramatically.
Radkey claims that the 'Greens simply lacked the initial military power to affect the outcome of the war". However due to the environment of the civil war and the number of varying peasant and worker movements, this assumption can not always be applied. Britain, America, Japan and many others had more resources than the Soviet Union but that did not seem to help them in the war against the Whites. The Whites were defeated because of their lack of organisation, morale and communication. The Greens on the other hand, only began with small uprisings. Radkey holds the view that there would have been many more rebellions if the Bolsheviks had not 'imposed a strong authoritarian regime in the wake of the civil war.' The Bolsheviks used the notorious Cheka to keep order in the country, and this would intimidate people into submission and end their rebellious behaviour. The Bolsheviks also politised peasants to fight harder against the Whites, with propaganda promising improved living conditions. The Bolsheviks managed to break down any unity amongst the Greens by offering land to the peasants they desired and by taking measures to strengthen links with the workers.
Propaganda in Russia constantly told the people that the Bolsheviks were in charge of Russia and life would improve. It is difficult to assess how successful the propaganda was because there were few object opinion polls, but the fact that rebellions existed shows that the Bolsheviks did not have control over the population in the way they imagined. However, propaganda may have reduced the threat that popular opinion posed. Although many rebellions posed strong threats it is unlikely that the popular movement would have defeated the Bolsheviks, because they had many spontaneous uprisings and the peasants and workers were spread across Russia with no one leader and the Bolsheviks, especially by the end of 1919, were very strong. 'The Bolsheviks must have been a tiny minority of the Russian population, which through superior organisation, ruthless determination and efficient propaganda snatched victory from an inefficient, divided and silent majority.'
After defeating the White Army, the Bolsheviks were forced to 'surrender before its own peasantry." The New Economic Policy was introduced because of the threat mass unpopularity caused to the Bolsheviks, illustrating that the greater struggle was with popular movement because the Bolsheviks were forced to make changes to please the Greens. Although the Whites did pose a threat to the Reds, they were divided, lacked morale and had weak communication lines. The Green and Red fight lasted longer, therefore there was more of a 'struggle'. Brovkin argues that 'military and strategic factors are far less important than popular attitudes in a civil war." The Red and White war was a far more military and strategic war, and the Green and Red a war of popular opinion. Brovkin concludes that 'the available evidence suggests...the magnitude of the Bolshevik war against the peasants on the internal front eclipsed by far the frontline civil war against the Whites.'