The publication of This comes mostly from its assumed political incorrectness, claimed implications for public policy, and doubts from the scientific community as to its scientific claims (Keenan 1999). In this essay I shall attempt to take a closer look at some sociologically significant conclusions reached in the book. It seems, however, impossible to review the book without references to the sharp criticism it sparked upon publication. I shall therefore occasionally refer to critics or related academic work.
The book sets out in an ambitious tone. In its introductory note, the authors forebode sensational conclusions, expecting 'that many people will have a "This can't possibly be true" reaction' (p. xix). It soon becomes clear that the book is intended for a wide audience, and throughout the book the authors continually insinuate this presumption. It is a point that is well worth noting, as we shall later see. The intention of the book, however, is not very clear at the outset. Vague notions such as 'for the last thirty years, the concept of intelligence has been the pariah in the world of ideas' (p. 1), and further, 'received wisdom in the media is roughly 180 degrees opposite from each of the six points [that we assume as a basis]' (p. 23) leave the reader with the idea that the authors are to set straight a grave misunderstanding.
In the first part of the book, an especially colourful language is used to make facts bear the authors' thesis. Throughout, references are made to other sources, providing the nature of a scientific work the reader has no other choice but to trust. Unfortunately, some of these claims are not always justifiable. As an example, when support is sought in the work of Block or Jensen, the book fails to bring forward other credible scientists' interpretations of the proffered data (Keenan 1999). Other sources may, however, present a very different view on the subject matter.
The virulent attack on the most controversial matters discussed in the book, according to Murray, 'often read like an unintentional confirmation of our view of the "cognitive elite" as a new caste', while 'when the Sturm und Drang has subsided, nothing important in The Bell Curve will have been overturned. I say this not because Herrnstein and I were especially far-sighted, but because our conclusions are so cautiously phrased and our findings anchored so securely in the middle of the scientific road' (Upstream). To put these claims in context, it is necessary to look at some of the criticism of the book.
As the book is quite substantial, and the authors continually moderate the argument besides cross-referencing chapters, it is difficult to either speak completely for or against the type of science that However, the idea that Sternberg brings up is worth noting. He says: 'The way that book is written is to, I think, say X on page 605 in sentence 8, with an appropriate caution, and then invite the reader to a somewhat more extreme conclusion elsewhere' (Miele 1995). In line with this claim, we find the authors introducing the idea of a possible constant deviation in intelligence between ethnic groups in a casual way: 'Americans have watched the spectacular economic success of the Pacific rim nations' (p. 272), as if this were a logical consequence of a population's higher IQ average.
In the unfolding chapter 13, which deals with variations of cognitive ability between ethnic groups, the book continues to provide the evidence for trends in intelligence difference between 'Asians' and 'Whites'. For this evidence, the book leans heavily upon the work of Lynn. A key claim, that IQ differences in the results are not generally found in culturally biased assignments, is here backed by only one source, Jensen. The work of this scholar, however, is certainly not uncontroversial and may even be racially motivated (Keenan 1999). Thus, where Murray and Herrnstein claim that 'there is no longer an important technical debate' (p. 282), Sternberg counters: 'To the extent that there is a consensus it is certainly not Herrnstein's and Murray's' (Miele 1995). Nonetheless, it is no more than fair to put forward Murray's response in the afterword of the book: 'Never mind that The Bell Curve draws its evidence from more than a thousand scholars. Never mind that among [the accused scholars] are some of the most respected psychologists of our time' (p. 564).
The authors of Start with the unpopular. Murray and Herrnstein argue that large differences in intelligence, generally taken to be measured by IQ test results, occur between different ethnic groups. Their conclusion, drawn from the evidence, is that 'it is important to remember that these are statistical rather than individually applicable conclusions' (p. 301). This is later presented in the book as a matter of choice for minorities in the United States of America (USA). Furthermore, the authors justify their course of reasoning by the fact that 'Cognitive excellence is increasingly valuable in the culture that is now in place in the United States' (p. 313). The justification for their stance on this potentially explosive topic seems to digress from the original purpose of the book, while the social danger of such statements is bound to exist.
How then do the authors of Only a paragraph seems enough: 'The studies of "blacks" or "Latinos" or "Asians" who live in America generally denote people who say they are black, Latino or Asian - no more, no less' (p. 271), and further they write 'race differences are varied and complex - and they make the human species more adaptable and more interesting' (p. 272). In this way, the authors appear to draw a direct connection between personally perceived ethnic differences and the distribution of cognitive abilities for different human groupings. It can, however, conversely be argued that, like all over the world humans are expected to be born with two arms and two legs, the distribution of intelligence may be expected to fit into a similar predictable model worldwide.
Opinions are still so divided about the issue that different conclusions are reached from the same data. As an example, the conclusions of Flynn are refuted by the authors as follows: 'He also says that Asian-Americans actually have the same non-verbal intelligence as whites', but 'Lynn disagrees and concludes 273). Perhaps the contrast cannot be presented starker than through the following example. Whilst the authors argue that 'tests results are matched by analyses of occupational and scientific attainment by Jews, which consistently show their disproportionate level of success' (p.275), Keenan (1999) insists: 'The Jews provide another example of the blending of racial distinctions. They are all presumably derived from one population [...] Gene frequency studies, however, show that now Jewish populations in different parts of the world tend to resemble their surrounding populations at least as much, if not more, than they do each other'.
The book consists of four parts comprising some 500 pages of textual body and several appendices providing more background. Part III, nonetheless, presents the most important and controversial findings. The authors recognise this, claiming, 'that many readers have turned first to this chapter indicates how sensitive the issue has become' (p. 270). It is difficult to accuse the authors of racist motives. Placing possibly controversial outcomes into a thought exercise, the authors state 'some people would interpret the news as a license for treating all whites as intellectually superior to all blacks [but it becomes] obvious how illogical [...] such reactions would be' (p. 312). It can, however, easily be said that the authors jump to conclusions about racial differences too soon, to go on suggesting changes in public policy in part IV.
The problem with this book thus lies with its scientific inconsistency. It sets out with no clearly stated objective, while the use of scholarly caution and polite integrity is broken soon after the authors bring it up. While the authors promise in the introduction to 'employ the more neutral term 22), synonyms such as 'smart' (p. 127), 'very smart... Very dumb...' (p. 133) that occasionally crop up nearly indicate the carelessness with which the authors draw their conclusions. Frisby claims that 'to parade facts about racial differences before the general public is akin to putting a lit match to gasoline' (Frisby 1995). The authors of In the words of Sternberg: 'If you were to ask, "What inference do Herrnstein and Murray invite their readers to draw?" they go beyond what they know' (Miele 1995).