The Enlightenment, an important feature in most written works on the origins of the French Revolution, has often been credited with the ideology that inspired the French masses to rise up against the monarchy. Though the association has been made, there is nevertheless no direct causal link between the " Other factors were present, along with the influence of the Enlightenment, which created the context in which the revolution occurred. To provide a satisfactory answer to the above question, the writer will attempt firstly to examine the ideas of the Enlightenment, and how it contributed to the Revolution; secondly the other factors that culminated in the Storming of the Bastille on the 14
The ideas of the Enlightenment have certainly had a great effect on the revolutionaries. Boosted by the 'public sphere'-the salons, academies, public lectures and pamphlets- the French people inculcated into their minds the principles of liberty, equality and fraternity, and this sense of 'enlightened patriotism', inspired patriotism and nationhood in the French people (Falkstein). The influence of the philosophes was particularly felt amongst the intellectuals, as the success of the Encyclopedia promoted among them the 'bold reforms and experiments ', though not necessarily a 'revolution in government.' According to Hobsbawm, the contents of the Encyclopedia reinforced the idea of political nationhood in the French, as people became aware of their intellectual and moral certainties, in contrast to 'the universal arid unattainable ideal of all humanity." The humanist optimisms of the Enlightenment, which has made people believe that they could shape their own destinies, by rational will and inquiry, also contributed to the rise of the revolutionary ideas in France.
The philosophes (Rousseau, Voltaire, Montesquieu, d'Holbach, etc) provided a language and an ideology of political criticism that was so sorely lacked before the Enlightenment-one that questioned Christianity, statecraft and aimed to foster arouse critical spirit among the people. Rousseau's Discourse on Political Economy (1755) was one of the most radical works, and it proposed a social contract between individuals and their government, in which a special 'general ' will replaced the power of the monarch. He also asserts the idea of the sovereignty of the people - a doctrine that would become a central feature of the French Revolution. Rousseau's Social Contract (1762) was another striking work, in which he concluded that 'the people's will is always right . Thanks to Voltaire, rationalism and critical spirit gained currency, even though some critics (e.g. Roger Chartier) regard Voltaire and the philosophes primarily as erudite littérateurs rather than committed philosophers. Other works such as d'Holbach's 'Dictionary of Atheism and System of Nature (1770) and the celebrated Encyclopedie (1751-1772) furthered the cause of the philosophes, imparting a vocabulary of criticism and a thought-context to the people and thus facilitating their participation in public debate.
Perhaps, the most significant way in which the Enlightenment contributed to the Revolution was that it created a climate of change that was conducive for the revolution to occur. The overall rise in literacy, from 29 to 47 per cent for Men between 1686-90 and 1786-90, and 14 to 27 per cent for women Large-scale diffusion of critical and denunciatory literature (not least in pornographic books targeting the royal family) transformed the representation of the monarchy in the minds of the French, and made them think of themselves as victims of a despotic monarch. Thus, in Roger Chartier's words, regardless of the intent of the 'philosophical books', it succeeded in producing an 'ideological erosion' that may have made the revolution inevitable. According to Darnton, even though the people did not call for a Revolution or foresee 1789, unconsciously however, they prepared for that event by 'desanctifying the symbols and deflating the myths that made the monarchy legitimate in the eyes of its subject." The increased criticisms of the established order (the Church and the Monarchy) may have therefore poisoned the mentality of the Public Opinion in France that eventually led to revolution. The Encyclopedie also aspired to embody 'the power to change men's common ways of thinking' so as to make a 'revolution...in the minds of men and the national character." Hence the fostering of the 'critical spirit' amongst the French was also an important consequence of the Enlightenment
The philosophes were also associated with the 'science of the government,' and thus worked towards the creation of a 'science of making laws' (J.J. Rousseau). This provided the revolutionaries with knowledge about the current government, as well as learned ideas on how to replace it with a more equitable one. Furthermore, the disciples of the Enlightenment (especially Voltaire and Diderot) He brought to light the unnatural and unjustified privileges of the clergy and of the Second Estate, and worked towards the reducing of the oppressive and dictatorial powers wielded by the state. All these helped to cement a sense of rationalism amongst the French people. Nevertheless, the ideas of the enlightenment have also been criticised, in the sense that their theories were too simple to cope with the complexities of real life, and the 'revolutionary ideal' as they espoused did not provide an effective platform for socio-political change (for example, the difficulty in deciding on 'virtuous' leadership). The Enlightenment has thus been described as an 'era of criticism rather than a moment of philosophical views of the world."
Amongst the other factors that contributed to the outbreak of the revolution, Hobsbawm He explains that the bankruptcy of the government and the resultant need for tax reforms gave the aristocracy and the parlements a chance to barter with the government. In exchange for the tax reforms, the aristocracy wanted an extension of their privileges, and this led to the forming of the assembly of notables and the calling of the Estates-General (a feudal assembly which last met in 1614). Hobsbawm concluded that the revolution thus began as an aristocratic attempt to recapture the state, but it underestimated the sovereign ideas of the 'Third Estate', and the socio-economic consequences of its political demands. What made the 'Third Estate' a force to be reckoned with was the fact that they not only represented the interests of the middle classes, but also of the urban poor and eventually, the revolutionary peasantry. In my opinion, the socio-economic context of revolutionary France was just as, if not more important than the influence of the Enlightenment. The fact that the revolution broke out in 1789 and not any other year was partly because of the bad harvest in 1788/9, which was reinforced by a particularly harsh winter. The severe economic consequences and the resulting industrial depression drove the urban and rural poor to desperation. The impact was heightened by the fact that in the preceding years, conditions were improving and things were turning out for the better. The expectations of the people were raised, and it came crashing down in 1789. Hobsbawm also suggested that the campaign of propaganda lent an added political dimension to the grievances of the people, and united them behind the deputies of the 'Third Estate'. Once the bastion of monarchical suppression and power (the Bastille) had fallen, there was no turning back.
In Roger Chartier's article He contemplates the possibility that it was not the Enlightenment that implied revolution, but rather, the converse, that it was the latter that constructed the former. He states that the retrospective construction were many-the 'canonisation' of Voltaire and Rousseau, by the revolutionary assemblies, as the intellectual fore fathers of the revolution, while others such as Buffon and Descartes were relegated; in the quest for legitimacy, political celebrations were held in Year II, honouring the philosophes and martyrs for liberty. The articles in the Declaration of the Rights of Man, which expounds on the freedom of Man, may have led to the belief that it was the Enlightenment that was the ideological inspiration behind the revolution. Perhaps it was a retrospective justification for the revolution and to put the revolutionaries on a moral high ground, since they were now seen not as mere rebels, but as agents of progress. Hence, 'it was the revolution that gave a premonitory and programmatic meaning to certain works, constituted, after the fact, as its origin.'
The relationship between the Enlightenment and the revolution is a complex one that does not lend itself readily to simple cause and consequence explanation. There have been mutual exchanges between the two, in the sense that the Enlightenment provided the ideology and legitimacy of the revolution, and on the other hand, the revolution also gave the Enlightenment a prophetic element in that the latter 'predicted' the coming of the former and prepared the people for socio-political change. Much as the Enlightenment has contributed to the revolution, we should not discount the other forces and events that were in place for the revolution to occur, such as the economic depression that led to the politicising of the masses, the bankruptcy of the monarchy, and the personal temperament of King Louis XVI (in particular, how he was so easily manipulated by his Queen and reactionary advisors). Hobsbawm has an interesting perspective to offer, in that he thinks the revolution would have occurred without the philosophes, but they 'made the difference between a mere breakdown of the old regime and the effective and rapid substitution of a new one." Perhaps we can then say that the Enlightenment was important only after the revolution had become a