The hypothesis put forth by J.C. Davis's While there is a sense that the debate has been bogged down by personal animosities and the lack of fresh interpretations, it is still of interest today, because of the pertinent "issues about historical methods raised by It is to this debate that we now turn our attention to, and I have structured the essay as such: the first section deals with historiography, methodology and the implications of Davis's interpretation on the discipline of History, followed by the main body of the essay which will focus on the two questions relating to our topic at hand-why Davis denies the existence of the 'Ranters', and subsequently, why he believes that the 'Ranters' were created by seventeenth century conservatives and twentieth-century Marxists. While Davis's interpretation is thought provoking, it is my opinion that his failure to differentiate between 'Ranter' myth and 'Ranters' has been a stumbling block in this debate.
Davis contravened the established line of historical inquiry that suggested the existence of a cohesive 'Ranter' movement, and argued that the 'Ranters' never existed as a unitary body of religious activists. He was further adamant against the notion of 'practical antinomianism', that certain 'Ranters' endorsed the trampling of social and sexual taboos, which is a basic tenant of antinomianism.
Gary K. Waite has remarked that certain aspects of Davis's work is brilliant, but that it has become "bogged down by personal animosities and the lack of fresh interpretations" In particular, the fault line between Davis and his other historians seems to be a heated argument between the 'Ranter' concept and 'Ranter' mythology. Davis denies the existence of the 'Ranters', even though many of his contemporaries contest this. His primary argument is that the existence of the 'Ranters' as an organised subversive sect, as theorised by Christopher Hill seems, in his words, an "imaginary seventeenth-century religious and cultural phenomenon". Hill ; Christopher Hill has suggested that the 'Ranter' core was a fusion of two strands of antinomianism-Coppe and Salmon- and a later radical attempt to demonstrate as clearly as practicably possible that Christ was the only Lord and law-giver.' While Davis contends that the phrase "all shalbe Ransome's" was ambiguous and not sufficiently precise in locating a specific group, he fails to take into account the 'ground-horn' effect the phrase had, referring to popular 'Ranting' (and near-hysterical) behaviour. Hill maintains that the same phrase was also used by Coppe and showed that the "somewhat flexible boundaries between the Ranters' and other radical sects" and demonstrates the lack of a distinguishing feature between them. Davis's failure to differentiate between 'Ranter' myth and 'Ranters' is blinding him from seeing the evidence of links between Coppe, Salmon and Webb, of which Hill has been a persuasive advocate.
The second and arguably the most pertinent issue in this debate is the existence or otherwise of the 'Ranters'. This brings us to the heart of the matter-Davis denies the existence of the 'Ranters' whereas the the other historians, such as Hill and Aylmer, assert that they did exist. Hill places 'Ranterism' in a broad historical context and links it with Anabaptism and Familism, drawing similarity between the three, such as the emphasis on immediacy, an otherworldliness regarding conventional ethics and a "clandestine or semi-clandestine character" Davis on the other hand, denies the existence of the 'Ranters' despite the sporadic evidence that points towards their existence. He is in particular, prejudiced against seventeenth century pamphlets, making the valid point that very often these pamphlets were written as propaganda to consolidate support for the different sides in the longdrawn Civil War. Nonetheless, these pamphlets can be used as sources of information of what was believed by historians as well as contemporaries. Both sides agree that there is a lack of evidence as to the practices of the 'Ranters', yet Hill and Aylmer are predisposed to trusting those sources that speaks of 'practical antinomianism' such the refusal to pay tithes and engage in illegal marriages, whereas Davis treats these sources with extreme scepticism.
Davis subsequently shifts attention to the twentieth century and accuses Marxists of creating a "myth of the Rant", which he believes was fashioned out of the same material as that used by the seventeenth-century conservatives. Hill and Morton's "History of England from theEnd of the Tudors to the End of the Stuarts" According to Davis, Hill and Morton's interpretation of English history is heavily informed by their political agenda: they utilise their Marxist bias to fill in the gaps of incomplete evidence and project their own ideals onto seventeenth-century ideologies. In demonstrating that practical antinomianism was consistent with a Left-wing ideal which favoured a charismatic, non-hierarchical, non-violent approach to social transformation, Hill and Morton were merely analysing the evidence from a different angle. It is true that the 'Ranters' did not possess the external hallmarks of Left-wing politics as we know them, but there is evidence that they shared some "family resemblances" with these groups, mainly stemming from an antagonism as compared to an affinity for the role of state. As demonstrated by Isaacson, the 'Ranter' ideal constitutes a very practicable mode of social interaction, especially since it can be seen as the very antithesis of oppressive authority. Had state authority been able to tolerate such a model of living, the 'Ranter' ideal may very well have taken the place of the "unsavoury alternative of
It is not my intention to decide who is right in this debate, but rather to try and bring some understanding of the issues at hand. While it is clear that Davis disagrees with Morton and Hill on many counts, we should not write off Davis's hypotheses off as baseless. There is, however, much inconsistency in Davis's own arguments which weakens his standing in the debate, for example, his accusations of using theory to construct history and presenting facts as evidence of theory can be equally applied to him. Davis's distaste for the labelling of the 'Ranters' as a collective and his belief in separate individual identities sheds light on his conception of the 'Ranters' as a sect-as opposed to a movement-as well as hinting as to his own conception and beliefs about how society should be ordered and function. As Roger Thomas has pointed out, Davis's own view of ""the fragmentation and atomisation of Ranter association", has its own resonance in the sense of atomisation of individual experience and interest within contemporary society.
Lastly, Davis insists that creativity and reinterpretation of seventeenth century materials characterise the use of the 'Ranter' myth by twentieth-century Marxists. There is no denying that others have used the myth for political gains, and that it has continued to be a fruitful source for interpretive exercises on the effect of politics on history. But such exercises do not invalidate the possibility of the 'Ranters' themselves as existing without being created by interest groups or belief systems. The survival of the 'Ranter' myth might just be due to its great entertainment value, though past stories may need to be embellished and exaggerated in order to fit the tastes of modern audiences. Though this tendency to plunge into new interpretations and to draw new meanings is admirable, where the 'Ranters' are concerned, it is important to draw the distinction between myth and reality. Until such a distinction is achieved, and Davis is convinced to accept that there was a group of individuals who undoubtedly shared the spiritualistic and antinomian ideas, albeit loosely and without any common ties, this debate will persist.
In conclusion, Davis's hypothesis, while novel, is not entirely convincing. The arguments of the other historians are a lot more persuasive, both in establishing a link between the various individual 'Ranter' leaders (despite the running debate about 'core' vs. 'milieu' which was not dealt with in this essay) and in their efforts to draw out some semblance of similarities between the various groups, while conceding that it impossible to define a coherent set of 'Ranter' ideology. This is not far off from Davis's own assertion that what would make him believe that the 'Ranters' existed would be the coincidence of two sort of evidences: that the existence of a group (or a number of groups loosely linked) can be established and that its shared ideology was reflected behaviourally in practical antinomianism. Perhaps one might cheekily suggest that Davis's own 'recantation' is overdue.