It was in the historical context of the religious and political upheaval of the 1640s, and the subsequent breakdown of censorship (which made fertile ground for the ferment of radical ideas), that Winstanley first made his appearance as a pamphleteer. Considering that Winstanley was only prominent as a writer between 1648-1652, and thereafter faded into oblivion, there seems to be a disproportionate amount of literature written about him, with little consensus over how we should understand such a complex figure. The most prominent debate revolves around Winstanley's evolution as a thinker- while most agree that he started off as a religious thinker, few concur on his predilections (secular or religious or both) in the While the question above seems to be fairly straightforward, it is in this writer's opinion that the position one takes in the fore-mentioned debate has bearings on how one would view the nature of Winstanley's religious outlook in Therefore, while an examination of the primary sources is necessary, it is equally important to consider the interpretations of some historians on Winstanley, and, as far as possible, how their biases feature in the following themes: the nature of Winstanley's millenarianism; his conception of God; his understanding of the Fall and Restoration; and finally his views on the institutionalized church.
Before launching into the essay proper, it is perhaps necessary to consider the approach that one should take when reading the pamphlet. While Bernstein's view that Winstanley used "religious phraseology as a cloak" has been superceded by writers more sympathetic to Winstanley's religious propensities This larger dispute about Winstanley's religious phraseology is somewhat defined by their different interpretations of what Winstanley meant by being "in a trance" Their different approaches to Winstanley's religious phraseology are perhaps most amenable to their respective evaluations of Winstanley's development as a thinker. Taking the literal approach allowed Mulligan et al. to assert that Winstanley remained to the end a religious thinker
Perhaps one thing that can be agreed upon is that Winstanley held millenarian beliefs While Juretic saw Winstanley's emphasis in Instead, he suggested that the Digger experiment was the key in the radicalisation and secularisation of Winstanley Also, in trying to set Winstanley firmly within the religiosity of his time by identifying him with his puritan contemporaries Perhaps Aylmer came closest to understanding Winstanley when he said that "the real interest of Winstanley lies in the totality of his challenge to established beliefs and systems of value...whatever his starting point as a religious thinker, he was not a normal kind of millenarian..." Due to Aylmer's stance that Winstanley's "communism and his theology are literally inseparable in his writings from 1649 on, even though the emphasis varies in different pamphlets"
A crucial part of one's religious outlook is constituted by how one understands the nature of God, and as with most other things about Winstanley, this is controversial, and is centred on two main positions-God is immanent as opposed to God being immanent and transcendent. The adherents of the former include Zagorin This view of Winstanley's "God", is most agreeable to their take on Winstanley as a whole, and disposes of the potential problem that the belief in a transcendental God might pose to their reading of Winstanley. Whereas those who take the line that Winstanley was influenced by theology throughout his writing career, assert his belief in an immanent and transcendental God. While both positions can be substantiated by a reading of Although the idea that God is immanent is littered throughout the text It seems to me that if Winstanley believes in a Creator God It not only seems absurd to think that God must be bound by an either/or straitjacket, but it is also simplistic to think in such strict dichotomy.
However, Winstanley's belief in a transcendent and immanent God does not make him less of a religious radical, despite what Mulligan et al. seem to imply Mulligan et al. appear keen to make Winstanley out to be a traditional millenarian, and this is reinforced by their interpretation of Winstanley's understanding of the Fall and Restoration, which is fairly similar to the traditional Christian understanding of it. Unlike Hill's radical Winstanley who believed that the introduction of private property constituted the Original Sin The scales seem to be tipped against Mulligan et al. as Zagorin's Winstanley saw Man's redemption "not in a heaven to come, and not through Christ's vicarious sacrifice, but by the restoration of the absolute law of reason." Aylmer too, acknowledged Winstanley's unorthodoxy in asserting that the Original Sin was not a historical event, nor was it inherited from Adam, but rather, it was "the defeat of good by evil, which is repeated in all of us..." The notion of an internal as opposed to historic and external Fall, Resurrection and Restoration is certainly radical, not to mention also that the Restoration would be complete only when Second Adam (within) kills the First Adam in us, and this inward restoration will be manifested outwardly in the abolishing of Private Property, and the re-establishment of the earth as a common treasury In using biblical concepts as metaphors to criticise the inequality prevalent in his society, Winstanley ended up creating his own brand of Christian heresy. While the need to substantiate his social critiques and ideas with biblical references is perhaps traditional, in the sense that he acknowledged the authority of the Bible and used it as a legitimising force for his ideas; his use of it is far from conventional, as seen from Winstanley's unorthodox understanding of the Fall and Restoration.
Up till now, the writer has focused on the debates surrounding the nature of Winstanley's religious outlook as a means of conveying the difficulty in assuming a singular stance, and the avoidance of a direct answer to the question so far is an admittance of Winstanley's complexity as a religious thinker. Not forgetting what has been mentioned earlier, there is however, more to be said about Winstanley's views on the institutionalised church, that do not take the form of the above. The lack of attention and controversy concerning Winstanley's anticlericalism (arising from his perceived hypocrisy of the clergy and their monopoly over the interpretation of Scripture, both of which result in the oppression of the people), his suspicion towards institutionalised Christianity, and preference for the personal religious experience, is probably due to the fact that these do not define Winstanley's uniqueness as a religious thinker, but were prevalent in other radical sects. His ambivalence towards an afterlife, belief in the perfectability of man on earth, notion of true worship manifesting itself in love, and the avowed tactic of non-violence echoes that of the Ranters, though the form that it took was different. It is interesting to note that Hill draws out quite a few similarities between Winstanley and the Ranters What remains most distinctive about Winstanley's religious outlook in The New Law of Righteousness is his concept of Restoration being tied up with that of the re-establishment of the earth as a common treasury. Hence it is the communism that is embedded in Winstanley's religious outlook that stimulates the reading of Thus, Therefore, as mentioned earlier, the different interpretations of the nature of Winstanley's religious outlook reflects the agenda of each historian in trying to conceive of a holistic entity that is Winstanley.
In conclusion, it is not possible to take Such interactions make it exceedingly difficult to give a straightforward answer to the question. Also, disagreements over how the text should be read has not made it easier to decipher the nature of Winstanley's religious outlook, as the study of the text seem to support more than one interpretation. The debates surrounding Winstanley's millenarianism, his understanding of God, his views on the Fall and Restoration; and the lack of attention given to his stance on the institutionalised Church all illustrate the importance of the agenda of the historian in his treatment of primary sources.