Traditional accounts on the causes of the Reformation necessarily included castigation of clerical abuses, such as concubinage, pluralism and absenteeism; the ignorance and poor training of priests and monks; and perhaps even the supposed failure of papal leadership as manifestations of the decay and decline of the Church on the eve of the Reformation. This view, and the more recent revisionist view of the topic in question has informed the main body of debate in scholarly circles, but before embarking on the essay, there are a few points that deserve attention. Firstly, the question suggests that what was 'wrong' with the Church could have led, in some sort of linear equation, to the birth of the Reformation. Following in the footsteps of Peter Marshall, "the intention is not to sift the evidence for signs of impending Reformation" Secondly, it is ambiguous as to what constitutes 'the Church'. According to Robert Swanson, there are two main definitions: "the restricted, institutional definition, which segregated the 'ecclesiastical' from the 'secular'..." and "the body of the faithful which made up the mystical body of the church which was also the body of Christ." To limit the scope of this essay, the first of Swanson's two definitions will be taken up, noting however, that this requires a generalization of the circumstances in the various national churches. This essay will avoid a direct, simplistic answer to the question but will instead attempt to put the criticisms of the Church into perspective and suggest that there was a certain measure of continuity, rather than exclusivity to the eve of the Reformation; and to locate the essay within the confines of the changing climate of opinion that may have contributed to the perceived problems of the Church. The recurrent themes of Expectations and Reform will be examined in the following context: the Clergy, the Papacy, Doctrines and Practices, and will revolve around the issue of the function of the Church.
The failure of the Clergy to live up to lay expectations of moral superiority (derived from being the agent through whom man communicated with God) and to fulfill the functions they were ordained for opened up the Church to criticisms, from without and within. 'On the eve of the Reformation, laity protested against pervasive clerical fiscalism, absenteeism, mal-administration, and concubinage..." and were joined in their castigations, by some members of the Clergy, and more notably, the humanists. John Colet, the humanist dean of St Paul's even went as far as to blame "all the ills of the Church on the secular lifestyles and 'covetousness' of the Clergy" and urged "reformation of the Church's estate" According to Duggan, even "Catholic and Protestant historians alike largely concur on the (sexual) 'immorality' of many Clergy on the eve of the Reformation." However, a reconsideration of the reaction to the abuses of the Clergy is necessary. Despite the widespread practice of concubinage, the population of Europe was not overly concerned unless this moral failing on the part of the Clergy impinged on their primary role of administering the sacraments. As Duggan articulates succinctly: "whether the clergy were 'immoral' or not, the more germane question is whether they ministered adequately to the needs of their flock."
The failure of the Church and the clergy to comply with the wishes of the laity led only to a 'discontent' or at least an inadequacy with the papacy; the demands of reform were more vocal in the 15 The inability (or at times, unwillingness) of the Church to fulfill this role, due largely to the lack of moral superiority of those in power, as well as the general laxity of administration, and this dissatisfaction with the functioning of the Church persisted throughout Europe through the fifteenth century. As might be expected, the reformers were not exempt from these criticisms. The fact that these criticisms were widespread could be interpreted in two ways: firstly, that the problems of the church had worsened over time and that the Pope, as a moral leader, had lost its authority; or alternatively, that the ever advancing regime of education amongst the clergy and laity has increased the expectations and sensitivity towards the ecclesiastical affairs, thus creating the impression that the Church was becoming more inadequate and irrelevant.
Furthermore, criticisms of clerical poverty and ignorance still plague the church. The shallow education of the clergy was, however, instigated by the Church itself, with the fragmentation of educational Institutions into separate faculties for Theology and Law, in the twelfth century. It is also pertinent to note that there was a degree of continuity with regards to the type of persons enrolled in the Church. Swanson rightly points out that "the pattern of recruitment among the higher clergy was not all that different on the the eve of the Reformation than it had been at any other time." Improvements in the level of education of the Clergy was most notably seen in the 'Reform Popes' (famous for commissions for the reform of taxation and Church appointments) who sought to remedy the situation. Moreover, the papal decrees listing the qualifications needed by candidates to be appointed to benefices, and the implementation of 'visitation rights' (for bishops to examine church discipline) also pointed to a concerted effort of church reform on the eve of the Reformation.
The fact that the Church was becoming more accessible to the Laity may have opened up the former to criticisms from their congregation. The increased interaction between the Clergy and the Laity may have led to the exposure of church flaws which may seem less apparent previously; and the printing of the provincial decrees and sermons denouncing clerical abuses, by the church, in the vernacular "might have convinced laymen not only of the widespread efforts of reform but also of the widespread problems of the church ...raising in some circles expectations that could not be realized."
At the top of the hierarchical ladder of the Church sat the pope. "...in the first part of the sixteenth century the papacy was undergoing a moral and spiritual crisis, its authority constantly being challenged by local governmental bodies and a growing number of intellectual dissenters" A condemnation of the Papacy for its perceived failure was included in the hierarchy of reformation. The two main points of attack on the Papacy were its leadership and it wealth. Towards this end, there were criticisms about "the pope's endless wars, the adoption of nepotism, the bondage to wealth and diplomats, avid secularism" and even it "unworthiness, because of moral as well as intellectual incompetence in the arts of government." Reformist ideas, such as that of conciliarists, who "sought to...restore a genuine sense of spiritual interdependence and freedom to the entire Church" But as Swanson adroitly brings out "this fundamentally hierarchical viewpoint was often interpreted in a select, partisan manner. Unsurprisingly, traditionalists (who advocated the hierarchical superiority of the pope), monarchists (in favour of the political power of the kings) and humanists (whose worship of classical antiquity had been the hallmark of Renaissance humanism) all had and shared different views about the nature and origin of secular and spiritual power and its proper relationship" Thus, though the issues of papal leadership and corruption constituted criticisms, the suggestions for reform in and of itself brought with it certain aspects of the old system as well. Moreover, although the papal sovereignty was under threat, it was nevertheless able to check the ambitions and roles of rulers and to force them to meet its demands, in order for their own ambitions to be met.
It is imperative to examine the doctrines and practices (in particular, the deep belief in Purgatory, the sacrament of Penance, and its derivatives such as relics, pilgrimages and most notoriously, indulgences) of the Church, which generated oppositions from the laity and clergy. Interestingly, criticisms of Church practices and doctrines existed in the late fourteenth century, in the form of Lollardy (led by the Oxford theologian John Wycliffe) called for a clear divide between spiritual and temporal power; obedience to the church authorities as far as their behaviour merited; the Bible as the only source of religious authority; condemned the doctrine of transubstantiation; and attacked the veneration of saints (and relics) The humanists also shared the view that the Church had diverged away from the one true religion, embraced misconstrued beliefs and had become too intertwined with the secular world. Convinced that grace and forgiveness could only come from God alone, Luther also harshly condemned the sale of Indulgences in his ninety-five theses. However, the cynicism surrounding the practice of Indulgences were not unique to the eve of the Reformation, and was a pervasive element in literary traditions, as seen in Chaucer's Pardoner's Tale which was written in 1400. It is interesting to note however, that the supply of indulgences was in response to the demands of the laity, and was perhaps a manifestation of the paranoia of securing one's own salvation. What is perhaps significant is that the demanding penitential system and mechanical ritualized religion offered by the Church only provided temporary relief for the laity, and had led instead to the exacerbation of fear and anxiety as reflected in the obsession with the constant absolving of sins.
In contrast to expectations of a strong, centralized papal government, the Clergy and Laity had grown more conscious of their national connections than their Roman ones. "Consequently there was a "new trans-regional loyalties—often expressed in the vernacular—which tended to compete with the traditional loyalties of the late medieval Church." Such climate of nationalistic sentiment could only be sensed on the eve of the Reformation.
Some historians have also suggest that the increasing desire amongst the laity for a personal and direct relationship with God, and the subsequent failure of the Church to cater to this aspect led many into the realm of mysticism. Though some have argued that mysticism could be regarded as a form of subversion, it is perhaps more appropriate to think of it as a supplementary to, rather than as a substitute for the institution of the Church. Mysticism of both the fourteenth and sixteenth century coexisted with the Church and may be seen as testament to the religiosity of the Age.
There is a possibility that the multiple responsibilities of the Church in society may have led to its resources becoming over-stretched, hence, compromising on the primary role of the Church to minister the sacraments. Swanson puts forth the idea that most of the anti-clericals "wanted churchmen to behave just as churchmen, rather than officious, interfering, lordly bureaucrats." However, the Church had for centuries combined both its temporal and spiritual responsibilities without much difficulty, and it appears rather peculiar that the church would find it hard to cope with its dual roles on the eve of the Reformation. Moreover, the increased accessibility of university education provided the necessary training for aspiring civil servants, and this would have taken the burden off the Church as a source of administrative officials, implying perhaps that the Church could concentrate more on its primary, spiritual function.
Although there were many problems (both discipline and doctrinal) that the Church faced, it is apparent that these problems had been in existence for the past one or two centuries, and that despite the criticisms, the aim of the reformers was not to subvert the church, but had in mind the desire to change the church into a more responsive, relevant and effective apparatus. Throughout the essay, the writer has tried to suggest that it was the rising expectations of a growing educated class (laity and clergy) and the inability of the church to keep up the pace of reform and to satisfy the needs of the laity - the disparity between expectations and reality- that led to disillusionment. Similarly, the high expectations that the Church set with regards to piety eventually led to the alienation of the people from the Church. Despite the deep-rooted flaws of the church, the attempts at reforming it suggest "men were seeking salvation and wished to find it with the help of the church." Hence, in trying to account for the Reformation, it is inadequate to merely examine what was 'wrong' with the church, but requires instead, a broader understanding of the climate and considerations (political, economic and social) of the Age.