China has long captured the imagination of the West, and still remains an enigma in this present age despite the vicissitudes of time. While technology now permits us to catch a glimpse of China on the news, on the internet, or plausibly, even visit China; this would not have been conceivable in previous centuries, where one of the few ways in which one could come into contact with, and conceive of China was through the objects brought back from overseas trade- which was itself stimulated by a thirst for the mysterious exotic Orient as much as it was for profit. Although these goods were prized for their scarcity, aesthetic value and excellent workmanship, it was not the material alone that captivated, but more importantly, it was the non-material associations that imbued the goods with meaning, desirability and the label of 'luxury'. This fuelled the luxury trade, long underpinned by traditional court luxury, which reached its zenith in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, with the establishment of the chartered East India companies and the subsequent creation of a European market for these goods. In short, it was through the acquisition of Chinese goods, which defined the 'Other', that one perceives the 'Self' in a clearer light.
China has long been an object of fascination for Europe, and nowhere is this enthrallment more apparent than in seventeenth and eighteenth-century Europe. From its mystical land of Cathay, the Chinese goods, ranging from silk to porcelain, seemed exotic and miraculous to the Europeans which helped fuel a demand and ensuing luxury trade. This paper will examine the fascination that Europe had for Chinese luxury goods, and how this manifested itself in the particular context of the seventeenth and eighteenth-century. It will demonstrate that this fascination was an amalgam- a complex cocktail- of exoticism, taste, sociability and civility, narcissism, progress and most importantly, of the mystique and secrecy that shrouded the production processes of the goods. Specifically, this paper will ascertain the role of the East India Companies (EICs) in marketing and 'customising' the Chinese goods in order to cater to western markets, and how this contributed to the fascination that Europe had for Chinese luxury goods.
Having looked at the various factors that brought about the fascination seventeenth and eighteenth century Europeans had for Chinese luxury goods, it is fitting to review developments in pre-seventeenth century Europe that are likely to have contributed to this fascination. We must begin by examining the medieval notion of the Far East which had been built up thanks to Marco Polo's exploits and The Flashing Sea, a collection of Chinese courtly tales, which stimulated the European imagination and perception of the Chinese Empire. This longstanding association with the marvellous, mysterious and distant other continued through to the Renaissance and the Baroque periods, and as Vainker argued, this "stimulated the West even more thirstily in pursuit of the products of the East." Thus, this fascination for the Orient was entrenched in the cultural milieu long before the seventeenth century, and provides an important backdrop to the changes in the luxury trade from the seventeenth century onwards.
The East India Companies (VOC and EIC) which were created at the start of the age of sail, coming at the confluence of two stores of thought-legal and economic, and the rise of maritime trade; were instrumental in creating the demand for Chinese luxury goods among the European upper classes. As the EICs were more successful, their profits increased, which enabled them to provide goods at prices within reach of the wealthier strata in Britain. Furthermore, the rising prosperity of the EICs also meant that the company directors and their ilk were better placed to afford these goods, or at least, to speculate in them. Conscious of the role that luxury goods plaid in the European court, the EICs were able to seize the opportunity to bring in Chinese luxury goods by leveraging their position as the sole legal trader on the European market. In addition to enhancing their trade monopoly, their lavish buying habits in China can be linked to their hope for greater trade by encouraging the Chinese to trade with them, as well as increase their credibility in the eyes of the Chinese. As can be seen, the EICs were in a privileged position for their successes in acquiring Chinese luxury goods was not only based on their purchasing power, but also because they had access to private collections in China that were not open to other Europeans.
To the enlightened mind, 'luxury' became seen as the formative principles of art and culture. Chinese luxury goods were particularly suitable in this regard because their 'foreignness' provided a useful backdrop- a reversal of the perception that the Orient was the East- that is of being "less refined", that foreign luxury goods remedied these 'deficiencies', and allowed one to access a higher refinement of taste; one that was not attainable within Europe or their culture. This aesthetic ideal was further moulded through extensive marketing by the East India companies, which through ingenious marketing strategies further encouraged the European fascination with Chinese luxury goods. Thus, it was through customisation and the moralisation of luxury that sparked the booming demand for these imported goods.
Perhaps the greatest testament to the power that Chinese luxury goods had to capture and enthrall the Europeans and supply these consumer desires (no matter who they were or that the commodities were removed from their cultural or religious contexts) lies in the fact that, even today, Chinese goods retain these same qualities of refinement and luxury that have spanned the centuries. This is particularly evident in the calligraphic writing, especially in the use of seals and stamp writing, where characters are inscribed in neat panache with sumptuous brush strokes on porcelain and silk which continue to capture the imagination of the affluent. Curiously, it has been observed that even newly discovered antique silks sell at almost twice the price of the newly made ones, testifying once again to the power of the 'Other' and conjuring up fantasies of the bygone Orient. Although porcelain has lost some of its appeal, "there is something in its glossy finish or elegant forms, that still has the power to arouse emotions" and still appeals especially to the well-heeled.  This traditional fascination of what the Orient has to offer the West extended to China during the seventeenth and eighteenth century as well, with a particular focus on the luxury goods that were in such high demand. These luxury goods attracted the attention of the Europeans, who sought them out not just for their beauty and practicality, but also for the non-material associations and social status that were conferred to them. The East India Companies manipulated the already existing fascination for the Orient into an obsession with Chinoiserie, a Western romanticised version of the East, by successfully capitalising on the exotic appeal of these goods and marketing them as semi-luxuries. Finally, these luxury goods were particularly captivating because they awakened the imagination of the Occident, allowing them to become acquainted with and appropriate concepts that were alien and unattainable to them, while having the power to evoke emotions that transcended time and culture.
In conclusion, this fascination that the Occident had for the Oriental luxury goods was not new, but was closely entwined with the captivating medieval myth of Cathay, and reached new dimensions in the seventeenth and eighteenth century with the establishment of the East India Companies (which were themselves the product of and the further stimulus to the West-East trade born of the Occidental preoccupation with the exotic, mysterious and abundant East) and the creation of European markets for Chinese luxury goods (which was previously the preserve of the European royalty). It is perhaps paradoxical that these Chinese luxury goods fascinate precisely because they have been displaced from their original cultures and grafted into new ones, but continue to give the impression that it was still possible to use them as prisms through which the West can subscribe to notions of Chinese refinement and skill. The fascination for anything 'Chinese' is apparent in the vogue for the Chinoiserie especially in the eighteenth century, and is both reflective of, and contributed to the existing enthrallment that the West had for the East, and how that affected the dominant taste in Europe. The appeal of Chinese luxury goods was also played up by the East India Companies which capitalised on the vogue for Chinoiserie, and created new wants through the successful marketing technique of making the foreign 'relevant' to the West through customisation. Finally, and most importantly, Chinese luxury goods were seen as having the role of "awakening the imagination" Despite being so far removed from their original cultures, that these luxury goods were relevant and fulfilled certain functions given to them by their European possessors accounts to a large extent for the fascination that seventeenth and eighteenth century Europeans had for Chinese luxury goods.