On Friday afternoon, the 26 My first intention was to observe activity and interaction in a second hand book shop, paying special attention to variables such as gender and age, and their potential relation to areas of interest. This, as we will see, proved to be difficult. Also, I intended to record noteworthy or unusual behaviour that might be caused by social circumstances particular to the shop.
Around 1.45 pm I entered the shop, and at that moment there were about three customers around, apart from the two shopkeepers. The shop, called Besides old and new books, the shop also sells postcards and old placard photos. The counter is situated downstairs, in the middle of the shop. A small staircase leads to a first floor, where a small room with academic literature and a big room with novels and poetry can be found. I decided to stay upstairs for a while. In the big room, there were two customers, besides me and a friend that I had brought along. The upstairs area creates a lesser degree of constraint, as there is no shopkeeper around and the street can not be seen. This might create a more closed-off environment. Still, the customers whispered, as would have been the case in a library.
Although customers where whispering, there was almost no audible interaction among them. A male customer of maybe late fifties looked for books around generally, while a younger couple was looking for books on pathology (or something alike). A woman of approximately the same age as me was furiously flipping through books on the other side of the room. No direct interaction existed between customers.   Eventually, after I stayed there for about 45 minutes, I went downstairs. Here I observed the same picture. Most customers came straight to the counter, and paid almost immediately after they ordered their books or postcards. I had noticed that the same woman was downstairs as well, and had bought something. On the counter I also noticed a woman of maybe 70 years of age, and two more customers, one of which was a baby of about one year old. At this point in my observation, there were at least 8 clients in the shop, although there were no perceptible interactions.   The relative silence created a strange picture, which made me draw the conclusion that people do not really want to interact, even if it is allowed. Talking on the counter seemed, even more than upstairs, not done. This led to the conclusion that the relative silence might be caused by the presence of the other people. Stronger evidence for this could not be found, however, as I left the shop at around 4.15 pm, when there were 6 customers and two staff members on the premises.  Even if the customers I observed were adults, they seemed to act like kids in a library, afraid to wake up the librarian! It came to mind that the atmosphere in the book shop might have been slightly better if there had been more customers, or less staff. As it was, people were not really interact not much, in fear of talking being considered 'noisy'.
I found a better case study in another book store called Additionally, Here I spent around two hours observing the shopping public. Although also not very busy, Most of the interaction was situated around the counter, where there was constant conversation between customers and one of the many members of the shop's personnel. The atmosphere in the shop is of the style of a 'walk-in shopping centre'. Many people come in to look around briefly, and nearly everybody does this by themselves. The counter downstairs is placed in the middle of the shop, presumably to make it easier for the personnel to make sure no theft takes place. Classical music sounds throughout the store; not the type of sensitive piano music, but rather dynamic orchestra music. However, the music is played quite softly, so that I observed no noticeable response to the music of customers or personnel.
When looking at the social interaction between customers and personnel, I can report the following. Generally, the personnel are very diplomatic and try to maintain a polite distance. Most of the transactions (of which there are plenty, due to the proximity of the counter to the entrance, offering customers a view of what the shop has to offer upon entering) were kept fairly brief. All personnel and customers polite in their interaction and conversations were usually quite commonplace. As such, I observed that the personnel tried to ensure a relatively subtle introduction of the shop's values to potential customers. Furthermore, the personnel were also quite active in highlighting certain types of books that are apparently part of the store's identity. This was obviously more successful with customers that seemed to come into the shop with an open mind.  I noticed that most people went downstairs in search for books; only a few stayed upstairs on the second floor, where I was also situated. The second floor is dedicated to less-commonly read books, such as Austrian literature, study books and reference works. It creates the atmosphere of a quiet reading room, with a few salon tables, a couch and several book shelves on the wall, without any employees around. To a certain extent I could observe the reading guests, and this is what I noticed.
One aspect that I observed, which I noted as noteworthy or unusual, is the fact that customers seem to tread carefully when being in the vicinity of other customers. This phenomenon can be explained by the fact that a certain agreement exists among customers about the quality of atmosphere that is desirable. This 'unwritten agreement' seeks to maintain the so-called 'bookshop etiquette', which consists of respect for each individual. Generally, this respect is expressed by speaking quietly and by keeping distance – if not physical distance then at least a respectful distance. Books showing titles such as 'how to get the most out of your relationship' indicate the individual nature of books and the following of their contents. Put differently, the customers give each other the opportunity to read, undisturbed, what books one might in private choose to read. This, then, accounts for the relatively silent and static atmosphere of the book shop, stimulating private activities such as reading, or browsing through books.
In the case of age, I observed two distinct phenomena by the use of the stairs. A person over forty years of age, for instance, usually went straight to the first floor. Younger people, aged between eighteen and thirty, would enter the shop undecided and shortly afterwards in most cases go straight downstairs. It was evident that older and younger customers often instinctively chose different regions of the store according to their age.
About the type of people, I can say the following. On the first floor, there was a majority of women among the customers. Most of them I guessed were over forty years of age. Interestingly, between the two floors there seemed to be something of a difference between the types of customers. Generally, customers downstairs were younger of age, and they spent less time in the shop. Moreover, the customers downstairs seemed to be more reactive to other customers. They seemed, perhaps, less accustomed to the unwritten rules of the 'bookshop etiquette'. What underlines this mode of thinking, also, is the method of classifying the books it offers. Children's books, bestsellers, as well as popular scientific books, are all on offer on the ground floor, while some books were displayed on tables on the ground floor, as well as on shelves at the top floor. Although at first it may appear inefficient and chaotic to place one book in two places in the store, we must look for an explanation to it.
On the ground floor, a more reactive atmosphere exists, possibly generated by children's books being mixed in with standard fiction and other popular books, and the fact that books related to newer scientific discoveries are (maybe by unintended consequence) located in this part of the shop, although indeed there is also a science table downstairs. This may explain why the customers on the ground floor exist of a more diverse collective: they are young, whereas on the first floor the customers generally are between forty and sixty years old; there couples and single people; people with an interest in modern scientific literature, and people looking for a book for their children.
It is furthermore interesting to note that the store succeeds to a high degree to create an optimal consumer atmosphere. There is little talking, people who intend to stay for a longer period easily find their way in search for their category of books, and the first floor, by concealing the street and placing the salon tables and couch, create an atmosphere where people can stay longer without being disturbed. It is likely that the customers recognise and reinforce aspects of this way of thinking. This is shown by the fact that people search for books by themselves, even if they enter the shop as part of a group. Other evidence is the maintenance of the 'polite distance' of which I spoke earlier. It is evident that consumerism decides to a high degree what forms of social interaction are accepted, and which not. In this, there is no great difference of interest between personnel and customer.