The luxury debates have been closely entwined with the rise of modernity, and while 'luxury' has ceased to be a central issue, in the supposed 'post-modern' world, I would argue that the issues that were pertinent to the writers of the eighteenth and late-nineteenth century are still with us today; and our knowledge of this past debate can only serve to sharpen our acumen, and make us more aware of the role of 'conspicuous consumption' It is my intention to examine the implications of the eighteenth and late nineteenth century luxury debates by employing these categories as a means of injecting a bit of order (albeit artificial) into the vast amount of literature written on this subject. Despite the tendencies of our relativist age to avoid crouching the debate in the language of morality, it is important to note that morality remains very much an integral part of the luxury debates, despite the shift from the vice/virtue dichotomy to one of dependence/freedom. Whatever their stands on luxury, the writers who participated in the luxury debates were keenly aware that 'luxury' was not a self-contained concept, but was rather a useful tool in understanding and critiquing the wider notion of the nature and progress of society.
The 'luxury debates' typically focus on the conflicting views between those who sought to rescue 'luxury' from its tarnished reputation, and those who vehemently opposed 'luxury'. A notable example was the Scottish Enlightenment theorist David Hume's 'Defence of Luxury' which sought to "rehabilitate the traditional’", and to challenge received prejudice by refuting the link between luxury and decay. Hume praised the "effects of luxury in Melting down the Barbarity and Rudeness of premature ages, in raising the Manners of Men and advancing Refinement and Civility" Conversely, Jean Jacques Rousseau's Discourse on the Arts and Sciences had as its remit, not only to deliver ‘luxury’ from its ‘unjust stigma of immorality’, but of course in opposition to Hume, Rousseau is asking “what moral benefit could result from the advancement of the arts and sciences”. This moral dimension of 'luxury' was perhaps most clearly articulated in Rousseau's Discourse on Inequality where he cautioned that: "it is in luxury that the division of ranks originates, and from luxury spring all the modes of pride and servitude." Though Rousseau's verdict of 'luxury' is much harsher than Hume's, both were of the same era, and their views are indicative of the intellectual divide between the 'moderate' and 'radical' aspects of luxury. Rexford Tugwell, in his book The Industrial Order comments on the differences between the two groups, and remarks that, "the moderate, or conservatives, of whom Hume was one, were willing to contemplate the cultivation of some luxury-but only a luxury of good taste and only after a greater equity of economic resources had been achieved." On the other hand, the radicals, to which Rousseau belongs: "were convinced that all luxury, regardless of taste, be it good or bad, represented a waste of the surplus produced by an economy and consequently delayed the achievement of an equitable distribution of resources." This divide has its roots in the classical debates which emanated from Plato (through Hobbes, through Mandeville and then finally in Rousseau and Hume) these debates often draw upon the contrast between ‘Old luxury’ and ‘New Luxury’. And it is upon the ‘Old Luxury’ that the radicals lay the blame on the 'follies of luxury' which have already been alluded to: "such Vices as extravagance, profusion, and a passion for ostentatious show, have universally disgraced the luxurious..." (Mandeville). Mandeville does not oppose extravagance in itself, but he is highly critical of luxury that is not tasteful, of showiness that serves no purpose but to vanity.  This distinction also eventually led to a discernable divide in what 'luxury' represented; for the radicals 'luxury' seemed to connote these aforementioned 'follies' and moral corruption, while for the moderate 'luxury' often stood for refinement, the appreciation of the fine arts, distinction, grace and naturalness. Herein lies an interesting theme of the luxury debates, which links gender to 'luxury' and its perception: The 'Old Luxury', the 'barbarism of luxury', was invariably ascribed to the female gender; women doted on luxury goods and were "irresistibly drawn to all kinds of artificial beauty and attraction"; axtibr snd the poise, which agreed with the Aristotelian conception of the role of women (and slaves)-as the playthings of men Indeed, the perception of luxury by Mandeville and Rousseau, seemingly have much to do with "the abject, idle and helpless state of the sex." and so it is clear that much of the "luxury in public" was actually the "ostentatious consumption of beautiful women of royal or noble birth, who flash jewels and silks whenever they appear in public."
This link between women, artifice, enticement and luxury might account in part for the 'Female Luxury', which Sombart, at the turn of the twentieth century harps on. Sombart attributed an important role to women of leisure in the development of luxury, and commented: "luxury was fostered by illustrious mistresses and promoted for their sake" In his central theory, which states that: "all personal luxury springs from purely sensuous pleasure" The notion of women as 'objects' or adjuncts is also suggested in Veblen's illustration of the corset. While it "lowers the subjects' vitality, rendering her permanently unfit for work...the loss suffered on that score is offset by the gain in reputability which comes of her visibly increased expensiveness and infirmity." Though these women may gain some 'reputability' for being women of leisure, it is apparent that the men on whom these women are dependent reap the bulk of this 'reputability'. Hence, while women seem to consume more than men, it is the case because women have a duty, as adjuncts, not only to consume on behalf of the household, but also to display 'conspicuous consumption' in a way that would serve to elevate the status of their husbands/master.
In the eighteenth and late nineteenth century luxury debates, central to the issue of luxury was the notion of the'Self'. Women in particular were judged on their ability to project and maintain a public image of refinement and civility, which necessitated the expenditure of considerable pecuniary and personal resources. Furthermore, women had to guard against public censure of 'excess', and adopt "somewhat ostentatious moderation." This 'self-policing' was an attempt to uphold the ideal of gentility, which "assessed unostentatious and correct behavior as more proper than extravagance and fashion". For men, the 'Self' was judged in much the same way with regard to the "extravagance in dress, entertainment and housing, to large retinues and attendants, and generally in the display of wealth" as Priestley noted. Domenico argues that greater significance should be granted to the private realm and the way in which men used luxury items as devices of emulation, competition and even friendship, in the context of the rising middle class. As such, the use of luxury, for both men and women, was no longer seen as a sign of corruptibility, but rather emerging as a positive symbol of civility, and mastery over the natural world, which did not assume its traditional association with scorn and public censure. This did not mean however that the old vices had vanished completely, and Veblen points out the irony that while the Victorian attitudes towards 'luxury' were more inclusive, the vices associated with the traditional notion of 'luxury' still existed, albeit in a modified form. This is exemplified in his description of the boudoir accessories, which "mostly take the form of the conspicuous and unproductive expenditure of a large pecuniary outlay....It aggrandizes the possessor without conferring corresponding material benefit on the social activities at large."
The concept of 'luxury' is of course a product of its time, and although there are certain features that persist through its definition throughout the eighteenth and nineteenth century, there were shifts in meanings that were inextricably bound up with the changing perception of taste and sociability. The modern notion of luxury, as exemplified in Veblen's commentary (see quote above), was viewed by the critics of the eighteenth century as artificial and hence, unnatural-a view that was rooted in their antediluvian repulsion of the foreign. Luxury then, was still associated with foreignness and vice, which is fittingly illustrated by Thomas de Quincey, where he exclaims in response to the wealthy inhabitants of London in the late eighteenth century: "we will not call it luxury...but...avarice, which is a great evil, and so far aggravated by its manifestation in a people naturally inclined to luxury". This position was supported by the observation of a decline in Chinese silk-weaving, which was attributed to the corrupting influence of wealth, and argued that these claims are not unfounded, due to the "native progress of luxury in China". The idea of 'luxury' as foreign and un-natural was challenged by the eighteenth century liberalizers such as Mandeville, who was in fact a closet-political liberal, who argued instead that luxury is "the sign of a society which is rich and enlarged by a hope of benefits that it can enjoy" ; and that "the possession of such goods is the natural property of those who can afford to pay of them" This view was also shared by the rise of the consumer societies in the late nineteenth century.  In attempting to explain the rise of the consumer societies, Sombart wrote in Luxury and Capitalism from the notion of "conspicuous consumption" Veblen argued that the late nineteenth century was the time when the competition for rank and power began to overshadow those for that of "economic efficiency", and that luxuries have become "marks of loyalty and trustworthiness to one's peers, devices of display to fetch an invidious comparison with the pecuniary strength of one another." While Smith had argued that luxury comprises of "utilities for the delight of human life", the late nineteenth century saw a broader conception, which extended further to include those luxurious objects that had "no reasonable or intelligible use." Therefore, Veblen's "useless expenditure, which is known as 'conspicuous consumption'...forms the basis of the leisure-class morality;" It is important to note however that for Veblen, the "real pride and joy of the human heart lies in pride of admiration from others" , thus emphasizing the link between luxury, consumption and the opinions of others. Veblen's observation that "the leisure class are not...manufacturers and producers"
The implications of luxury did not merely pertain to the self and society, but were of national importance, as it affected the material and nonmaterial well being of the nation. The suspicions generated about 'luxury' are perhaps in part the product of its association with 'foreignness' The advocates of the Scottish Enlightenment, David Hume and Adam Smith were keen to challenge this antediluvian attitude and promote luxury as a "progressive social force" As Hume argues persuasively "...in most nations foreign trade has preceded a refinement in home manufactures, and given birth to domestic luxury...and their delicacy and industry being once awakened, carry them on to further improvements in every branch of domestic as well as foreign trade." A classic example would be the stimulus that the Wedgwood pottery industry received from the East-West trade in porcelain, which created the market for fine dinner services that Wedgwood was able to capitalize on in the mid eighteenth century. It is often the argument employed by the advocates of luxury (notably Mandeville) that the demand for luxury would "lead to the expansion of commerce and the wider employment of the poor"
This economic argument by no means displaced the element of morality in the luxury debates. Though Mandeville accepted traditional associations of luxury with vice, his central thesis "that Private Vices by the dextrous management of a skilful Politician may be turned into Publick Benefits" is indeed refreshing, and justified the state's act of harnessing the demand for luxury as an engine for economic growth. Diametrically opposed to this line of argument, Rousseau instead espouses the view that civilization corrupts because civic virtue is compromised as a result of the development of the arts and sciences. Rousseau sarcastically commented: "the ancient politicians forever spoke of morals and virtue; ours speak only of commerce and money." Morality was an intrinsic part of national well being, and the attack on luxury and its association with moral corruption was often raised in the light of national wars. In particular, "French critics associated luxury with France's humiliation by England during the Seven Years' War"; in England, the war "also provided a platform for a denunciation of French luxury..." and "journalism during the war years rehabilitated classical condemnations of luxury in defence of Britishness."
It should be obvious from the above that "luxury was not so much a key term in a debate as it was the marker for certain anxiety-'a convenient code for all of society's perceived problems.'" The luxury debates reinforced notions of 'Female luxury' and the close associations of women with consumption, without a deeper understanding of how men have helped shaped the ways in which women consume. It also served to highlight the modern tendency to use goods as the "primary vehicle for the construction of the self that has the opinion of others as an indelible part of its contents." The changing definitions of luxury and its subsequent link with taste also illustrate the changing expressions of sociability, which reflected the change in the pecuniary structure of society. Despite this and the argument that luxury facilitates social progress, there is a realization that while the luxury debates are becoming more inclusive, the gap between the haves and the have-nots has not narrowed, but have instead widened during Veblen's and Sombart's time. This has obvious bearing on the well being of a nation, and the social distribution of income is still very much on the present agenda. Lastly, despite the modern preference for economic arguments, the link between morality and luxury has been paradoxically strengthened, and remains as a bastion from which the critics of luxury draw their ammunition. The luxury debates therefore became an avenue where the problems of society were raised, and correspondingly, where the shape of an ideal modern society could be discussed.