Over the last twenty years qualitative research has risen from an approach of the study of social issues to a widely practiced method for understanding how people view themselves and the world around them. Qualitative research involves findings that are not arrived at by statistical or other quantitative procedures. The data used in qualitative research varies in many form, the main focus of the essay will be on verbal report data and discourse analysis.
Discourse analysis is a type of qualitative research that uses verbal interactions to analyse the social construction of reality. Discourse analysis is a tool for exploration and understanding of social life and behaviour, rather than an explanation. This essay will discuss the advantages and disadvantages of using verbal reports and discourse analysis and the implications this has for the study of psychology.
One of the most widely used forms of discourse analysis is semi-structured interviews, which are also often known as conversational interviews. These interviews enable the researcher to explore issues at greater depths than is typical in structured interviews, and therefore aim to explore what has been referred to in the discourse analytic studies as 'discursive context' (Schegloff et al., 1977). By using these semi-structured interviews the researcher is able to gain an understanding of the events, feelings and experiences of those being interviewed. Through hearing the words of those involved the researcher is able to gain a better understanding of the thought process behind the words. These semi-structured interview can also be used in counselling sessions, thereby allowing the researcher to gain an insight into both the patient's verbal and non-verbal language, which in turn can provide an idea of the meaning those words may have for the patient.
Verbal reports can be divided into two branches,those of first person perspectives and of third person perspectives. First person perspectives refer to the data that is provided through self-report such as questionnaires and interviews. This data is often used in discourse analysis, as the focus is mainly on the contribution of language. Third-person perspectives refer to the data provided by observers, who are said to be in a stated of 'multiple surveillance'. Here, an observer may focus on 'facial expressions, posture, voice and the like'. These perspectives may be used in combination, by using first person oral data enriched with third person perspectives, such as recordings of actual conversations, (Coyle, 1995). Qualitative research, which uses verbal reports can make an additional contribution by providing insights into the structure of social behaviour that cannot be grasped through quantitative information. Gee (1995) states 'Even if we could measure souls (something modern psychology cannot do, nor will be able to do) we would still need discourse analysis to be able to 'read' and understand meaning embedded in language,' (as cited in Kemmerer, 1999). This addition contribution to psychology, that discourse analysis generates, can be generally found in the form of the identifications of the values, strategies and understandings of the speakers (Potter & Wetherell, 1987). These aspects of language use can only be gleaned through close analysis of the use of language and hence the use of discourse analysis. The development of discourse analysis has, in part, been founded on theoretical ideas derived from sociology and linguistics. It is closely related to the notion of 'discourse community' which come from the work of Gee (1995, as cited in Kemmerer, 1999), and Dell Hymes (1969). Discourse communities allow for a community to judge, or rather influence the discourse behaviour of its memebers. It is believed that the development and functioning of discourse communities render qualitative research methods essential in the understanding of the functioning of spoken and written language (Coyle, 1995). Qualitative research has raised questions regarding the nature of the scientific approach to inquiry, especially from the more traditional quantitative perspectives (Denzin & Lincoln, 1994, as cited in Merrick, 1993). The question of how investigative approaches, such as discourse analysis, that are qualitative in nature, can be based on scientific premises has, until relatively recently, remained an issue. Potter (1996) suggests that one way of contrasting the methodology of discourse analysis and traditional scientific inquiry is to think of the model of the natural sciences, in which scientific knowledge is gathered from clearly specified anticipated properties, as a confirmatory model, whereas discourse analysis can be thought of in terms of generativity or creativity.
Qualitative research can also play a primary role in hypothesis generation without the need to appeal to a post modernist philosophy, which questions the need for set criteria exists in judging the products of qualitative research (Denzin & Lincoln, 1994, as cited in Merrick, 1993). In theoretical sciences the depth of knowledge from past experiments and theories constrain the choice of sensible hypotheses (Burt & Oaksfield, 1999). Therefore it is suggested, that in the light of recent views that considering psychology as a science, we need qualitative research to fill the gap in relation to the lack of theories. Qualitative methods systemize and give structure to the process of hypothesis generation. The resulting hypothesis can then be subject to objective testing in a truly scientific way. However we do have to be aware that it is difficult to conduct objective experimental tests using qualitative research. People may not always be willing or comfortable with sharing their experiences with the experimenter. In this case, it may be more appropriate to change the type of verbal report used. For example, people may feel more at ease verbally expressing their feelings in the form of writing.
In conclusion, it is clear that qualitative research is very useful for psychological research; however there are certain limitations that should be taken into consideration. The primary limitation is that qualitative research cannot provide an answer to any psychological query; therefore it cannot be plugged into a particular pre-defined question. Also, since the data used in qualitative research tends to be already present, it is impossible to ensure the reliability and accuracy of a study. There is also the issue of generalization; it is difficult to generalize the findings of qualitative research to other contexts and populations. Qualitative research is more suited to case studies or particular contexts, rather than general research,
The criticisms associated with qualitative research indicate that we need to formulate a set of criteria that allows the quality of analysis to be evaluated (Denzin & Lincoln, 1994, as cited in Merrick, 1993). Having said this, it is also possible that we could evaluate the research, especially in terms of validity, by using the above-mentioned method of allowing the readers to judge the interpretations themselves. The use of verbal reports and discourse analysis has increased in popularity as a research method and has resulted in many contributions to the study of psychology. Nevertheless, this method does have its problems. Discourse analysis does not have an answer to any psychological query; therefore it cannot be plugged into a particular pre-defined question. Therefore discourse analysis should not be seen as just a research method but also as a whole perspective on social life, (Potter, 1996). Also, there is the hope that in the future, discourse analysis will continue to develop further and offer considerable more contributions to the various aspects of psychology.