This essay aims to discuss three areas of psychological phenomena that have been found to account for a vast number of wrongful convictions, tragically affecting the lives of many people. It appears that the majority of wrongful convictions arise from eyewitness error (Wells, 1993). In light of this, this essay will use criminal cases to demonstrate how false memories could be induced into eyewitness accounts, by examining both child suggestibility and hypnotism, and will also how, even without the implementation of false memories, the complete misidentification of a suspect is possible. From a legal standpoint it is extremely necessary to be aware of these psychological phenomena and their effects on individuals, as it could help to not only diminish the amount of wrongful convictions, but also help convict more of the guilty.
The case of Kelly Michaels aptly demonstrates how highly suggestible children can be. In 1983, a nursery employee was charged with 23 counts of sexual assault against 20 children under her care, based on a child's comment of how she had used an anal thermometer on him. Michaels was later convicted on 115 counts and given a 47-year sentence. However, in 1992, it was judged that "the questioning of the children was so suggestive and coercive that they were rendered incompetent to testify" (State Vs Michaels, 1994, p. 493) and Michaels was released, thus suggesting the children's reports of abuse were false.
Despite the possibility of internal factors, such as, undeveloped memory, linguistics and schemas accounting for the childrens false reports (Bruck, et al., 1997), it has been reported that adults are far greater sources of distortion than any underlying cognitive deficit (McGough, 1996), and interviewer bias is extremely influential on children, producing numerous false reports (Goodman, et al, 1995). The case of Kelly Michaels was particularly ridden with inadequate interview procedures, including the repeated questioning of the same direct questions; a factor frequently associated with children's false reports (Quas & Schaaf, 2002; Ceci, et al., 1994, Bruck, at al., 2002). The source-monitoring framework states that the ability to remember the context in which an event occurred develops gradually with age (Johnson, Hashtroudi, & Lindsay, 1993) and in the absence of episodic memory (because the event did not occur); decisions are based on familiarity (Ruffman et al., 2002). Therefore, as a child has a limited source-monitoring capacity they will rely on familiarity to judge whether events actually occurred. In this case, as the children were re-asked questions immediately after giving an answer, the children may have assumed the initial answer was wrong and corrected it to please the interviewer, and continually providing this 'desirable' answer in repeated questions will ultimately increase familiarity. This is supported by research showing that children's responses can be influenced by contextual factors, particularly repeated questions and the perceived omniscience of an interviewer (Lewis,al. 1995). Consequently, suggestibility is more likely to be attributed to an interaction between internal and external factors, as it appears the interaction between repeated questioning and inadequate source-monitoring can result in false reports.
It was alleged that the prosecutors had severely disrupted the children's memories through extended interviews (e.g. 4 hour pre-trial interviews). This could be due to the fact that a child's memory is far less consolidated and due to the interviewer's bias, in which the verbal/nonverbal cues they give could serve as powerful postevent misinformation (Lewis, al., 1995). Also the children were continually shown a video of the teacher so that the children would take action if necessary, instead of merely saying what happened. Therefore, it appears that the children's memories were, not only distorted through suggestive questioning, but also through verbal/nonverbal cues, and post-event information.
The investigators of this case were actually told to engage in lengthy, repeated and direct questioning as this would be required for children to disclose the truth, as they have a tendency to initially deny any abuse. However, it has been recently argued that the strongest studies, in terms or methodology, indicate that if directly asked, children do not deny sexual abuse (Bruck & Ceci, 2004). Therefore, it appears that the combination of repeated questioning and being repeatedly told of their teacher's actions, led to increased familiarity, which in turn, due to inadequate source monitoring, resulted in the false reports. This coupled with the numerous other erroneous police procedures, highlights the need for the police to be made aware of certain aspects of child development and ways in which to elicit more accurate testimonies. This is especially required as younger children are only more susceptible to suggestion when there is a biased interviewer, otherwise they remember just as accurately as older children (Ceci, Ross & Toglia, 1987, as cited in Toglia, Ross, & Ceci, 1992).
False memories can also be readily induced in adults. In particular, hypnosis has the power to also create entire memories (Loftus, 1997), and therefore its ability to merely alter a memory is hardly surprising. In the case of Larry Mayes, hypnosis led an eyewitness to completely misidentify Mayes as her rapist. After spending 21 years in prison, he was later exonerated on DNA evidence. On Oct. 5, 1980, a cashier was raped by two men. At the time she was could not identify either of the men, other than to say one was taller than the other. The cashier was hypnotised by a detective and shown a photo line-up, where she picked out Mayes, despite failing to identify him in a prior physical line-up.
In 1984, after six-months of psychotherapy, the victim was hypnotited and asked to identify the man she could recall as harassing her before the rape. In the hypnotic state, she recalled the person as a man she had seen driving a van around town and mentioned he was one of the perpetrators. The police gave her a photo of Larry Mayes, which the victim rapidly identified. This was despite her having previously stated that one of the men was tall, and Mayes being six inches shorter than her original description. The victim pleaded guilty to the charge of obtaining a false identification due to her inability to decide if the identification was produced in a hypnotic or non-hypnotic state.
However, although it is suggested that recall increases under hypnosis, accuracy does not (Dinges et al., 1992), as suggestibility to leading questions and post event information has also been found to increase (Dywan & Bowers, 1983). State theorists would claim that as the witness in the case was placed in a dissociative state when recalling the perpetrator, her cognitive processes and hence, reality monitoring (i.e. distinguishing between memories of real and imagined events) would decrease, and so she would have been unable to source monitor any suggestions placed in her mind. However, non state theorists would argue that the detcective's authority increased the witness's acceptance to suggestions, as research has shown misinformation acceptance to increase with the perceived authority of the source of that misinformation (Toglia, et al., 1992). Also, when badgered by an official interviewer, witnesses become rattled and tend to change their memory recall (Wright, 1995, as cited in Wright & Loftus, 1998). It was also alleged that the detective particularly wished for Mayes to be convicted in order to provide information on an unrelated homicide. Therefore, during hypnosis the detective may have implanted the false identity, or at the very least, utilised leading questions.
These ideas are supported by Reiser (1963) who reported that hypnosis increased the amount of wrong information recalled. As hypnotic suggestibility involves post event information acceptance (Kirsch &Lynn, 1995), even information verbally implanted during the interview could produce false memories. Indeed, hypnotic post-event information has been found to increase false memories more than nonhypnotic post-event information (Sherman, et al., 1997). Within police interviews the closest analogy to hypnosis is extreme and lengthy concentration, and so if this is combined with leading questions and misinformation, false memories can occur. Indeed, regression techniques, in which the interviewer begins by asking questions about the event before the actual crime, have particularly been found to accompany false memories (Pezdek & Wodarski, 1993). Also, a hypnotic state can be created by requiring the witness to stress the importance of detail (Loftus, 1997) and also by leading questions such as "I want you to try to remember". Consequently, it appears likely that these type of interviewing techniques would have meant Mayes was convicted even without hypnosis.
This could suggest that even without being affected by hypnotic suggestion, eyewitness accounts can fall victim to false memories or misidentification.
This last case highlights the possibility of complete misidentification of a suspect in the absence of false memories, and also the power of real eyewitness accounts. Bernard Webster was misidentified by 3 eyewitnesses even though he did not resemble any of the original descriptions. It appears that the majority of wrongful convictions due to eyewitness misidentification arise from poorly conducted line-ups (Wells, 1993). For example, in the case of Bernard Webster, it appeared a photo-biased line-up was in part to blame for his wrong conviction. Webster was sentenced to life in 1982 for a rape committed in 1966, on the account of three mistaken identifications. All three of the eyewitnesses had failed to identify him in a pre-trial photo line-up, leading to his removal from the official line-up. The victim had been raped in her apartment, during which the rapist was reported to be much more muscular and that his hair was longer than the suspects. However, during the line-up, a detective suggested the victim pick out the suspect based on his eyes, a previous description used.
In this case, a poorly conducted line-up led to 3 people misidentifying Webster, including the victim, despite him being 8 inches shorter than their original descriptions. It has been proposed that, when selecting a suspect out of a line-up, people undertake a relative judgement process and choose the person most resembling the culprit relative to others in the line-up (Wells, 1984). It is possible that as the initial photo-line-up did not show any conceptions of height, and also as the original descriptions were vague; the witnesses may have resorted to relative judgements in the line-up. This identification could have then led to a subsequent photo-biased line-up, in which the witnesses identified Webster as he was the only one present in both line-ups (Loftus, 1996). This familiarity, like the process of unconscious transference, may then be mistakenly related back to the crime rather than the photo line-up, (Loftus, 1996).
This study does however appear to have further implications for line-up methods. Whilst photo line-ups provide a means of quickly surveying multiple suspects, as this case shows, comparisons maybe made on the basis of suspects pictorially rather than upon absolute judgements, thus increasing the chances of misidentification. Research by Wells (1984) has suggested that a sequential line-up, whereby witnesses view each suspect one by one rather than all suspects simultaneously, could reduce this. This is because it would encourage absolute judgements, as suspects are then compared to an internalised image stored in memory, before another suspect is shown; (Loftus & Zanni, 1975).
Evidence advocating the sequential line-up has resulted in the sequential-superiority effect; that is the procedure produces a higher ratio of accurate identifications to mistaken identifications than a simultaneous line-up (Wells, 2001). However, sequential line-ups are also approached with criticism. Gonzalezal. (1993) has proposed that showups (i.e. the presentation of a single suspect) may be a better method of identification as they also lead to absolute judgements, and despite Lindsay and Wells's (1985) claim that accurate identifications are unaffected in suspect-present line-ups; these identifications have been found to decrease by others (cited in Ebbeson and Flowe, 2002). In light of this, Ebbeson and Flowe (2002) have suggested that sequential line-ups, rather than initiating absolute judgements, merely raise the criteria for making a positive identification, as witnesses become more cautious of their decision. In response, Wells (2001) now claims that sequential line-ups include both absolute and criterion judgements. Regardless of the type of identification process incurred, it remains apparent that a sequential line-up would have reduced the chances of Webster being misidentified, especially as Maryland courts appear reluctant to use sequential line-ups (Willing, 2002).
To conclude, it is apparent that wrongful convictions, such as the Kelly Michaels, Larry Mayes and Bernard Webster cases, highlight the need for the police and legal system to be aware of aspects of psychology in order for witness confidence to be adequately handled. Research has found children to be generally highly suggestible to family and authority figures, especially when repeated questions and erroneous suggestions are implemented. This suggestibility can also affect adult memories, as illustrated in the case of Larry Mayes, where his conviction was solely based on the identification made under hypnosis. The effect of suggestion appears to be fairly enhanced when made by an authoritative interviewer; and so it is important to minimise the influence of authority during forensic interviews, to minimise suggestions being accepted as truth. Furthermore, there are still many issues to be addressed with regards to line-up procedures, and so these should be constantly monitored to ensure their fairness and effectiveness in garnering accurate information.
To conclude, this essay discussed three areas of psychological phenomena that can contribute to wrongful convictions. It could be seen how child suggestibility and hypnotic suggestion can lead to the generation of false memories, and even with the lack of false memories, misidentifications can still occur due to systematically inadequate police procedures. Firstly, it appears that in order to reduce wrongful convictions, awareness about child development and interviewing techniques should be implemented into the legal system, to ensure correct procedures are being adhered to. Secondly, any recollection coming from hypnosis should also be used with extreme caution, to prevent incorrect identifications or worse, false confessions. Lastly, police procedures should also be seen as a crucial area, as they can also lead to misidentifications. It has been seen how even the most common bias present in line-ups, relative judgement processes, can produce erroneous identifications and that they must be rigged with certain precautions to reduce the likelihood of misidentification. However, it is also apparent that research is ongoing and the UK is currently looking into ways in which to reduce incorrect identifications.
In addition, hypnosis is an extremely powerful tool and so should only be used in extreme cases, and most importantly, when it is guided by someone of equal authority and than the authorities. It must be performed by someone with expertise in the area and following a set of standardised steps (Gudjonsson, 1989; APA, 1985) as research has suggested that unsophisticated participants make greater errors than experienced ones (LaPorte et. al., 1991). Approved hypnotic techniques must also be used and the hypnotist should only question about topics he knows will produce correct responses (Ofshe, 1992). This stresses the need for the authorities to find an appropriate hypnotic practitioner; as this case, as well as others, would strongly imply that the Detective was neither, and it is likely that his influence induced the false memory.
And finally, although line-ups are based on the premise that the perpetrator is one of the suspects, this is not always the case, and so other measures should also be employed. For example, along with implementing sequential line-ups, witnesses should also be explicitly made aware that the perpetrator may not be present, as this can significantly decrease the number of misidentifications (Malpass & Devine, 1981). As line-up procedures are system variables (Wells, 1993), there are many aspects that can be manipulated in order to produce less erroneous identifications. Fortunately, some US states are now incorporating research based guidelines set by the justice department on conducting line-ups (Willing, 2002) and similar guidelines in England and Wales have also been set up (Wells, et al., 1998). However, although not all guidelines are being adhered to by everyone, the law does generally satisfy them (Kebbell, 2000), and so valuable progress is being made
As it is clear that eyewitness error can occur in a number of different ways and that these errors coincide with extremely confident testimonies, it seems imperative for both witnesses and the legal system to be aware of these factors so steps to reduce the number of wrongful conviction can be implemented.