The nineteenth century was, until recently, predominantly seen as a century of rapid industrialisation which set the stage for profound social change. This way of thinking about the birth of a capitalist society, however, fails to recognise the two sides to the changes that took place. After all, not only was there rapid increase in supply, also was demand of consumer goods ever increasing (McCracken 1990:5). Earlier examples of cultural consumerism in various forms of frequent local gift exchange could already be found in the late eighteenth-century (Finn 2000:143). However, consumerism in the Victorian period took a different and much more broad-based shape through various agents, of which most importantly department stores and an 'unparalleled advertising craze' (Loeb 1994:5). And while men in the eighteenth-century were themselves participating consumers in an informal, pre-capitalist local economy, in the last decades of the nineteenth century mass advertisement of an impersonal character began to target almost only women as their potential customers (Loeb 1994:8) in a highly formalised mass commercial economy.
The Great Exhibition of 1851 and William Whiteley's department store
An important inspiring agent of the so-called 'orgy of goods' (Loeb 1994:3) of the nineteenth century may be said to have been the Great Exhibition of 1851. The enormous display of unprecedented comforts, luxuries and riches was seen as a 'miracle of material civilisation' (Finn 1998:36) and came to symbolise the aspirations of a nation. Indeed, the exhibition also provided a model for transition from one purchasing audience, the upper classes, to a broad based one (Rappaport 1996:81). At the same time, visiting of such an event also became an expression of middle class gentility. Within a few days over 6 million people visited the exhibition, most of them members of the middle classes (Finn 2000). Those middle class people, seduced by the 'esthetic raptures' (Loeb 1994:4) were able to mix with the upper classes, without feeling embarrassed or excluded by their lower economic standing.
The most influential agents in fuelling the Victorian consumerist craze and driving the force of change can easily be said to have been the department stores of the nineteenth century. These general stores were the places 'where ordinariness and cheapness made commodities alluring to virtually everyone' while making 'the material objects of the new consumer society objects of desire' (Loeb 1994:3). These department stores, as Holcombe (2000:4) has it, not only had economic importance as the basis of a retail system, but also were part of the 'visual and psychological environment of the city' due to their impressive architectural constructions. Among the most famous and successful stores were Harrods, Bleriot and Gamages in London, W. & G. Foyle McAllister Bros. in Belfast, and the Army and Navy Stores. Most predominant in their spectacular rise over the second half of the century was however Whiteley's, a private department store which, when opened in Westbourne Grove, London in 1863, soon earned its fame for being 'the universal provider' (Rappaport 1996:61). Its customer base, as with many stores, included people of all classes due to its comparatively affordable prices, although the greatest portion was found to be made up of the middle class (Rappaport 1996). But besides providing an almost inexhaustible variety of goods on sale, the department store also became the stage for 'conspicuous consumption': Besides orders, items were displayed with detailed aspects to draw in potential customers. Especially the central feature, the tearoom, was a source of shame for some (Finn 1998).
Beside William Whiteley's London store, several other importers and shop-keeper in the 1870's came to open exclusive department stores, such as the Oxford Street's Army and Navy Co-operative society (Rappaport 1996). Also, in many smaller towns new shops opening in the last decades of the nineteenth century adopted the look of the large department stores, with merchandise advertised in window displays and various seasonal sales (Rappaport 1996, McCracken 1990). Shopping itself also was radically changing. The viewer's relation with the goods was altered from a tactile self-sampling to a passive ocular manipulation (McCracken 1990:14). Indeed, since the middle classes were suspicious of transactions with servants as well as being disgusted with haggling, the new stores solved this problem of shame. The shop assistant was quickly becoming an aloof, albeit helpful, 'guide and confidante' who, as Rappaport describes it, 'moved consumers without protest, physical or verbal, through the transgression of buying' (Rappaport 1996:91). Middle class customers could walk through the store unaccompanied, just to get on about their 'rational' shopping experience (McCracken 1990).
The pervasiveness of consumerism in the late Victorian period as a civilising process did not arise without consequence for the fabric of society. As consumption no longer accounted a 'shameful public indulgence' in the eyes of the middle class, it increasingly was seen as a logical and necessary part in achieving the desired level of refinement and the image of a 'Universal Provider' (McCracken 1990). In this culture of consumption, rather than just an increase in goods exclusively for the benefit of the male ruling class, both men and women now adopted consumption as part of the greater civilising process of the middle class. Whereas the male population quickly fell under the spell of the new cultural artefacts (McCracken 1990: 25), it was the female middle class who was most in need of encouragement and an altered gender ideal. They were allowed and even encouraged to purchase goods. Shopping was not simply a matter of convenience, it actually 'structured responsibilities in the private realm and schemas of public display' (Rappaport 1996:74). Shopping was no longer seen as the mere purchase of materials, but generally as an 'exercise of taste' (Rappaport 1996:69), lending a great importance to 'daily gestures of appreciation and rejection' (Rappaport 1996:67). Women were encouraged to gratify themselves in a 'ravenous', materialistic way, expanding beyond the home and family (Rappaport 1996:96). Whereas traditionally, femininity for middle class women was characterised by qualities such as 'selflessness, gentleness and intellect' (Rappaport 1996:67), this new form of consumption created a new kind of femininity which, rather than being centred around the household, transformed these qualities into 'matching handbags with outfits' and the decoration of one's home (McCracken 1990:19). Shopping was also used and rethought as a way of communication; where signs among the middle class of various kinds of 'taste and knowledge' (Rappaport 1996:70) were achieved and exchanged (McCracken 1990).
Advertisement did not play the least role in this newly constructed female middle class identity. From an early point, advertisers came to accept that 'the hand that rocks the cradle is the hand that buys the boots' (Loeb 1994:8). Throughout the second half of the nineteenth century, techniques of persuasion became increasingly refined (McCracken 1990:29), shifting the portrayal of the household mistress in a shape of the 'perfect lady' through images in an often historical, near-mythological style (Loeb 1994). Such portrayal of rather powerful, controlling women attempted to equal the act of shopping to having 'the opportunity to', as a critic wrote disdainfully, '"luxuriate" in a deep and intense "sense of power"' (Rappaport 1996:76).
In an ever-increasingly commercialised public sphere and with products becoming available that promised a 'refinement of one's home and one's persona', an ideology began to emerge of a genteel commodified middle class (Rappaport 1996:67). As the middle class was now no longer defined only by elite leisure, but also by comfort and pleasantness, 'the middle class man [and woman] strove to be a "Universal Provider" for family and home' (Rappaport 1996:73). The admiration for the military in particular came to signify a strong conviction in the power of discipline, 'rational thinking' and organised consumption (Loeb 1994). These values were echoed in advertisement. For the holidays of Easter and Christmas, department stores advertised through the 'family love and matrimonial tenderness, which marks these festivals' (Loeb 1994:17).
In the last decades of the nineteenth century, mass advertisement was indeed taken to bewildering but effective levels, with store patrons eager to partake in the offerings of what was known as the 'Universal provider'. This middle class provider could supply citizens with almost every good one could imagine which, tied to the practices of easy credit, for a while 'converted retail as a whole from purchase to hire' (Loeb 1994:6), allowing the middle class to 'maintenance themselves in a sort of dream state of continual provision and renewal which enabled them to float through the life' (McCracken 1990:11).
To conclude, the design of the department stores and shops of the nineteen century opened the door not only to a facile way of buying, but also to an open acknowledgement and display of a material civilisation that that had once been declared in the Great Exhibition. Whole families could enjoy various attractions; not only could genteel leisure activities be found in their halls, in the upper floors theatres were built and informal concerts, poetry readings, art shows and puppet shows held (Rappaport 1996:61). Even more, goods like bicycles, kites, tennis equipment and photographic supplies showed that consumption could be linked to a moral, pure and civilising way of life (Rappaport 1996:62).
Conclusion
Whereas social changes and higher living standards were previously seen as the result of industrialisation and the great increase of supply of a wide range of goods, the driving forces on the 'demand side' are now becoming increasingly appreciated and researched (McCracken 1990). One of the reasons for this enormous increase in consumption may be found in the fact that new markets were sought to create a demand for this surplus of goods (Rappaport 1996:81). However, this does not tell the entire story. The general enthusiasm with which new material achievements were hailed had a profound effect on society and the way in which the middle class defined itself as part of it. Also men, and more particularly women within the middle class were both changed and changed their identities consciously with increasing consumerism. As 'shopping' was essentially gendered as a female activity in the second half of the nineteenth century, changes of gender perception were most acutely visible with women. Women were now encouraged to beautify themselves and surround their middle class homes with a paraphernalia of gentility.