Selective attention is one of the mechanisms we use to manage complexity. As it is not possible to attend to everything in the environment, we tend to inherently select the relevant and filter out the irrelevant. Studies into selective attention generally involve a task in which the aim is to select the relevant information and ignore any distractors; hence a decrease in speed or accuracy would suggest a difficulty in filtering out irrelevant information. However, studies of aging and selective attention reveal various age-related deficits, which also appear to divulge information regarding other areas of ageing. For example, these studies can provide insight into the specific attentional processes affected and the ways in which they are affected. This essay aims to provide a review of ageing literature on selective attention, discussing the experiments and theories that arise from them, illustrating that our knowledge from this type of research can not only provide valuable insights into other theories of ageing but can also help us to improve life in old age.
Selective attention is a cognitive process that involves the focused selection of relevant information and the ignoring of distractions. It has been widely suggested that ageing is linked to a decline in this ability, with numerous studies providing evidence for this (Salthouse, 2000). Studies of visual search also support the presence of age-related alterations in the ability to filter out irrelevant information. visual search tasks require participants to locate an object with specific properties (e.g. colour, shape) within a visual array that comprises targets and distractors. It has been found that age differences occur in the search times for such tasks, with older adults taking significantly longer than younger adults with similar abilities (see to Kramer, Hahn, Irwin & Member, 1998). This pattern is generally attributed to the difficulty older adults have in inhibiting irrelevant information, as they have less control over their attention.
The emergence of feature-integration theory (FIT) has given us a further insight into the processes underlying age differences in selective attention (Treisman & Gelade, 1980). FIT suggests that visual identification of relevant information in a display involves two processes: feature extraction (the selection of an individual feature from an item) and feature integration (identifying items through combining multiple features). FIT suggests that with age there is a decrease in the speed and accuracy with which features can be integrated; thus we see age decrements during conjunctive searches. The Conjunction Search paradigm provides support for the FIT as the presence of conjunctive items (multiple items possessing the same features) should result in an increase in reaction times, and studies have found a linear relationship between the number of items in the search array and the reaction time (Madden et al., 1992). Certain experiments have also shown that as display size increases it has a greater effect on older adults (Rabbit, 1965). These findings suggest that not only is the efficiency of determining a target item affected, but so is the efficiency of suppressing irrelevant information (Groth, & Allen, 2000).
Studies examining the effects of aging on selective attention have revealed various age-related deficits, although the theories associated with them are vast. One such theory is the generalised-slowing hypothesis, which suggests that age-related cognitive decline is due to information processing being globally and proportionately slowed (Salthouse, 1991). The findings of early visual search research were based on this theory (Rabbitt, 1965), as it was found that increasing the display size had a greater effect on older adults implying that age differences are more pronounced during more complex tasks (Madden & Whiting, 2004).
Another approach to explaining these age-related cognitive deficits is the reduced- inhibition hypothesis (Hasher & Zacks, 1988). This hypothetical proposes that age differences are due to a decrement in the ability to control cognitive processes in the face of distractions. Hence, as inhibition plays a key role in visual search tasks, this hypothesis was tested through explorations of selective attention. Research into inhibition has predominantly focused on using the famous Stroop Test (Straoop, 1935).
The classic stroop task involves subjects deciding whether the colour of an emotional word matches the letters presented and, it is found that older adults are more susceptible to interference from the semantic information as they tend to show longer reaction times when the colour of the word does not match the word's meaning (Humphrey & Kramer, 1997; McDowd & Shaw, 2000). This discrepancy is thought to be the result of an inefficient process of inhibition (Hasher & Zacks, 1988) and hence this could imply weaker inhibition of irrelevant information or, greater interference from relevant information. Therefore, preferences for individual tasks need to be considered when testing for specific age-related slowing.
Given the above data, one could conclude that age-related reduces in inhibition is the cause for the age difference performance for selective attention tasks, however, critics suggest that as with any correlational study merely observing a reduction in RT does not necessarily mean that inhibiton is reduce but may simply be indicative of generalised-slowing (Salthouse, 1991). According to Salthouse (1991), any age difference that does not conform to a linear relationship or when reduced across the age range should be interpreted as evidence of specific rather than general slowing. Salthouse (1991) also suggested that age differences should only be seen as evidence of generalised-slowing if two conditions are meet: 1) RT and age must have a linear relation, and 2) that the magnitude of the age difference must remain constant across age range.
Although this explanation is popular, there is still debate as to how much evidence the generalised-slowing hypothesis actually provides. It has been argued that the presence of an age-related decrement in large conjunctive tasks may indicate a presence of both task-specific deficits and generalised slowing (McDowd & Shaw, 2000). That is to say, if the age-related slowing is found on both the conjunction task and the feature tasks, then this could suggest general slowing, but if age-related slowing is only observed on the conjunction task, then this could point to a task-specific deficit.
Salthouse (2000) has concluded that many tasks include contributions from both generalised slowing and task specificity, and so we should be cautious of viewing these interpretations as mutually exclusive theories of age-related performance change. Therefore, although more empirical work is required, more theoretical work would also be needed in order to identify the best approach for explaining the observed age differences (McDowd & Shaw, 2000). It has been suggested that task-specific processes may be useful in expanding our understanding of selective attention in older people as it may influence the degree of age-related slowing. Therefore, we may even be able to produce measures to decrease the amount of age-related slowing that it occurring (Madden et al., 1992). It is also important to bear in mind that most evidence for the generalised slowing hypothesis is based on reaction time data and that this can not be the sole measure for selective attention.
More recently, another approach that has arisen from selective attention research has been that of cognitive resources. This approach aims to view attentional processes as resources which can be flexibly allocated as and when needed (Salthouse, 1996). Salthouse (1996) proposed that ageing causes a reduced availability of resources resulting in more efficient distribution of these over a range of cognitive and perceptual activities. This multitasking deficit hypothesis, which is closely related to that of information-processing resource theory (Salthouse, 1991), claims, in simplified terms, that a "decrease in task performance (with age) is the result of the effective competition for resources" (p. 24). Studies have found that if two (or more) tasks are made similar in terms of stages of processing (Salthouse, 1991), then the age-related differences are relatively consistent with the multitasking deficit hypothesis.
These reduced selective attentional capacities also have a number of cognitive consequences, most of which can be aptly explained by the reduced-inhibition hypothesis. A number of studies have examined the role of selective attention in language comprehension and found the reduced inhibition to account for the age differences as older adults have difficulty in inhibiting distractors that are embedded in a text (Zacks & Hasher, 1994, 1997, as cited in McDowd & Shaw, 2000). However, Dywan & Murphy (1996) found that younger adults who had supposedly inhibited the distractors also remembered them capably, whereas the older adults who had used the distractors had trouble remembering them. As a result, Dywan & Murphy (1996) attributed the age-related differences to source-monitoring errors, stating that older adults are unable to discriminate between the source being the target or the distractor. In spite of this, reduced inhibition has also been considered to affect memory performance as memory for relevant information would be poor due to working memory containing irrelevant information (Hasher & Zacks, 1988). However, this explanation also has conflicting views as the majority of research is based on divided attention studies that suggest memory deficits to be due to a diminished attentional capacity. In addition, selective attention studies have also shown reduced inhibition to affect performance in complex problem solving tasks. Molander and B Regardless of the approach taken, these studies have shown us that diminished selective attention ability in older adults, as a consequence, also reduces language comprehension and memory and problem solving, thus showing selective attention to affect many aspects of the lives of older people.
Studies into selective attention have been active for a number of decades now, and have not only provided us with valuable insights into other theories of ageing, such as generalised slowing, which can then be used to improve life in old age but have also provided a number of tools to measure and differentiate attentional processes which can also give us a better understanding of the complexity of cognitive ageing and its underlying causes.
Studies into attention have found that attention could also be a processing resource, as it may serve as a source for other cognitive operations (Salthouse, 1991). Therefore the age-differences we see in experiments may in simply be attributable to a general reduction in attention (Hasher & Zacks, 1988; Plude & Hoyer, 1985). However, there seems to be a difference in opinion as to how we should measure and differentiate attentional processes. Plude and Hoyer (1985) assert that "...measuring attention consists of evaluating the selectivity of information processing" (p.52). However, the majority of research states that the focus should be on divided attention (Burke and Light, 1981, as cited in Salthouse, 1991). This is also reflective of a common flaw in the design of attention studies; namely their need to isolate different attentional processes. This appears to be counterproductive if attention is a processing resource, as it is difficult to entirely separate attention from other cognitive activities (Madden & Whitling, 2004).
In conclusion, it appears that age differences in selective attention are due to a variety of factors which also interact with each other. That is to say, age related slowing in general processing speed can have a knock-on effect on selective attention, as can an age-related decline in inhibitory/focal attentions capacity contribute to a greater susceptibility to distraction. All in all, these studies demonstrate that the cause of age-related deficits in selective attention could cause performance to differ in a variety of tasks (McDowd & Shaw, 2000).
As selective attention studies have shown attentional processes to also facilitate numerous other cognitive activities (e.g. language, memory and problem solving) it is clear that attentional deficits affect many aspects of the lives of older people. Therefore, it would be beneficial to use models of cognitive processes to help understand and improve the interactions between older adults and their environments (McDowd & Shaw, 2000). Research into to selective attention can also aid us in helping older adults with their day-to day tasks, such as by enhancing their interactions with technology (McDowd & Shaw, 2000), for example, by minimising excessive 'distractor' items in a visual display, or by providing environmental support to facilitate attentional processes, as cues are often found to reduce age differences in selective attention (Shaw, 1991). It is clear that the most important findings arising from selective attention studies are the theories that have contributed to numerous explanations for many aspects of cognitive ageing in general.