The objective of this exercise is to find, by experimental means, the moments of inertia of three steel discs. These values will be compared to those found using a known theoretical relationship. Estimates of errors incurred (by simplifications or otherwise) shall be made and their effects described and accounted for.
Introduction  The exercise outlined in this report is to calculate, experimentally, the moments of inertia of three steel discs using the properties of torque, inertia and angular acceleration. Comparisons will be made to values of the moments of inertia obtained from theoretical analyses. Errors incurred in the measurement process will be noted and discussed.
The main conclusions drawn from this experiment will refer to the moments of inertia of the discs and the accuracy of those results. Their accuracy will be evaluated by comparing experimental results to theoretically derived values, and after scrutiny of the errors incurred.
There are two strands to the purpose of the experiment. They are, firstly, to understand how the linear and rotational versions of Newton's second law relate and, secondly, to gain experimental experience about the 2
objectives of the experiment. The first objective of this exercise is to understand the relationship between linear and rotational versions of Newton's second law, and how this links with the equation for the moment of inertia. The second objective is to gain experimental experience with the moments of inertia of objects. From basic motion equations, the linear and angular versions of Newton's second law shall be deduced. The form of the equation needed to calculate the disc moment of inertia shall be constructed using this knowledge. The relevant equations found for the calculatory procedures will be clearly identified and explained.
1. To experimentally determine the moment of inertia of three steel discs accurately.  2. To compare experimental results to theoretically derived values.  3. To assess the accuracy of the results and identify sources of errors.
The conclusions drawn will refer to the moments of inertia calculated from experimental results and the accuracy of those results in comparison to those calculated using mechanics theory.
The illustration left shows the steel disc and falling mass arrangement with the quantities that are important in the experiment.
From basic motion equations
(where v is velocity and is angular speed)
Differentiating with respect to time gives
(1)
Therefore
Now using the constant acceleration equation
it can be shown that with zero initial velocity
Therefore using (1)
This law in angular terms converts to
(where T is torque, I is inertia and angular acceleration - 'a' from the diagram)
On inspection of the diagram, it can be seen that
and therefore, using (2)
Using (3) in (4) gives
hence
Now, given that the mass 'M' in the diagram falls much more slowly than it would do purely under the force of gravity, a good approximation of mg is
Rearrange (5) to give
Using (6) a good approximation for the moment of inertia of each of the discs can be obtained. The theoretical formula this experimental approximation will be compared with is
Where M is the mass of the disc and R is its radius.
With this knowledge it is possible to devise a method to gather experimental data.
The experiment showed the discs to have moments of inertia:
The accuracy of these numbers is good. They are all within 30% of the value found theoretically.