The Midland Metro is part of
The public transport industry is one which contains numerous competing technologies (cars, buses, trains etc.) but no immediate competition within the light rail technology itself. This phenomenon is characteristic of
These companies have many similarities. For example, regarding the industrial structure, five of these seven firms were designed, built and maintained by public sector companies. This diffusion has not occurred by chance; the reason for it is essentially government control as is explained later.
The structure of the light rail industry is such that each localised firm has a monopoly for light rail travel. In the wider context of all public transport, trams do not have a monopoly. A comparison of Hirschman-Herfindal indices (the index shows dominance on the scale 0 to 1 where 0 corresponds to perfect competition and 1 is a total monopoly);
Source for part ii figures is reference one, see below
Light Rail System	Hirschman-Herfindal Index Sheffield Supertram	0.68 West Midlands Metro	0.83 Manchester Metrolink	0.85 Croydon Tramlink	0.89 Nottingham Express Transit	0.93 Docklands Light Railway	0.93 Midland Metro	0.98  Source: 1. http://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/environment/public-transport/england-2006/light-rail.htm
This industry is considered an oligopoly due to the fact that few firms operate in the industry and that the firms that do are not in direct competition with each other. There are also significant barriers to entry that contribute towards the concentration of control of light rail networks within the UK.
As discussed above there are no instances in the UK where light rail operators are in direct competition. The public transport sector as a whole is still worthy of scrutiny.
This answer was written in response to The question posed was pertaining to whether an acquisition of the Midland Metro light rail system would be beneficial or the creation of an alternative business model to compete with the Midland Metro a more attractive proposition.  The main rationale supporting an acquisition, compared to establishing a new business model, is outlined below.
This is an email response from
Only commercially run routes can be serviced by operators who do not win contracts. This situation arises because
The legal environment is comfortable for companies operating existing light rail systems, anti-competitive practices such as fixed fares or line extensions by the incumbent operators are prohibited by the Competition act (1998) and the Consumer protection Act (1987). This legal protection makes it difficult to enter the industry as a new operator.  The main criterion for deciding whether to proceed with a new venture is whether a reasonable financial return can be achieved. As can be seen in the table above, return on capital employed (ROCE) and operating margin are two critical aspects of assessing the financial performance of a light rail system. Financial Return of LightRail Companies
The financial figures are no more encouraging as this source shows.
With the exception of the Sheffield Supertram this last financial year, none of the light rail systems in Sheffield, the West Midlands, Manchester or Croydon have made a profit in the last two years. Based on the figures shown, on average there has been a It is fair to say that the industry is inefficient at creating profit at present.
The operating cost of the industry is still high and in some areas losses are made, however it should be noted that a 90% figure is hardly unusual in the early years of any venture, including those of the private sector. A figure of around two to three percent should be achievable with modern operational methods and efficiencies
and working with the initial capital used to set up the business in 1999 ( A value close to 1% would be good; anything below zero is poor.
"Patronage is expected to build up over time, reaching maturity after some five years of operation" This information somewhat alleviates the impact of the financial and patronage figures but one should note that those five years have passed for the Sheffield and Midland providers and for the majority of the Manchester system. In reference to the life cycle of the product, light rail systems are somewhere between rising star and maturity.
Barriers to entry are considerable. Three key barriers are the vast amount of capital required for business establishment, legal and government restrictions and, to a lesser extent, switching costs. These barriers are explored below.
Capital Intensity required for business setup
It takes a great deal of capital to set up a light rail system, even without the need for tunneling or other expensive construction elements.
$100m - $200m   would be necessary before a business was even in a position to opening its doors. This, most likely, can only realistically be undertaken by large corporations which may be looking to economies of scale and thus gain more profit with a lower price (due to implied unit cost reductions). This is, of course, beside the obvious financial risk of the venture.
Legal or Government enforced restrictions
"Local authorities decide whether a new light rail line or system is appropriate for their area and usually have to seek funds from the Department [for transport] and be granted legal powers by the Secretary of State for Transport before their schemes can proceed."
This has threefold implications for prospective market entrants;
the local authority must be satisfied that a new light rail system is appropriate;
the Department of Transport must allow funds for the scheme; and
the Secretary of State for Transport must grant the scheme permission to be constructed.
Likely costs incurred overcoming these problems would be;
Switching costs
The switching costs associated with light rail systems are more likely to occur during the operational phase than at the establishment phase. Changes in technology could lead to considerable cost if an operator was to swap from one light rail technology to another. For example, a shift away from diesel-electric propulsion to electromagnetic would require considerable expense. The same would apply in the reverse direction.
With an understanding of these barriers to entry the argument for acquisition is stronger than that for setting up a new firm. Acquisition is a more attractive business venture because it removes two of the barriers to entry described above, those being government restrictions and switching costs. These do not apply since a new firm would not need to construct a new line and would not need to gain local or central government backing or financial support. Furthermore, provided
Recommendations
Recommendation
The acquisition of Midland Metro would not be as risky a business manoeuvre for reasons detailed in the previous section. My recommendation is that, if you are to either set up a new business in competition with the Midland Metro or attempt an acquisition of that company, then an acquisition would be the best strategy. Irrespective of the decision to purchase Midland Metro or establish a competitor, a cost leadership strategy would be most appropriate.
It is possible that given the rising concerns about the impact our way of life is having on the environment that government may increase its efforts to persuade people to use public/ environmentally friendly modes of transport. If such a campaign were to be successful then light rail and other public transport could become a much more attractive industry. It may be worth waiting for a more favourable climate (in terms of personal transport) before attempting to enter this industry.