Over a period of four hours, a mock Participative Rapid Appraisal (henceforth PRA) was performed by two groups of students each comprising about 15 individuals, one group posing as the representatives of a village community from Ethiopia and the other as NGO workers. This experience and information found in literature provide the basis for an examination of the effectiveness of PRA's. An analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the PRA technique concludes that its implementation offers an effective methodology but that its success is influenced enormously by the competence, experience, creativity and even good fortune of its organisers.
Canaan Banana, the former president of Zimbabwe, is quoted by Michael Edwards in his 1989 article entitled, "The irrelevance of development studies" as follows;
The emphasis Banana puts on involvement in the development process as being indispensable for a successful development practitioner is the same idea that is central to the PRA technique. PRA is intended to achieve a synergism between the scientific, anthropological and social knowledge and the rural, cultural and historical knowledge of the PRA practitioner and indigenous people respectively.
The PRA technique outlines an ordered structure of method set in motion by preparatory information collection and consultation culminating with the evaluation and recommendation of proposed changes. The consequent decision and action are the ultimate aims but much of this procedure is qualitative rather than quantitative which adds to the difficulty of evaluating its effectivity.
The advantages of this approach are plentiful and significant. It can eliminate any risk of misinterpretation by involving the local people in the analysis of the collected data and can create a harmonious match between the needs of the development workers and those to be served by the proposed development.  Because of its reliance on the active participation of the indigenous people concerned, PRA allows them to be extensively involved with the appraisal process and learn knowledge and skills that they can later use in their own situations. This goes further than just empowering individuals as it should also enhance the sense of identity and community spirit within the target group.
PRA's are required to encorporate at least some degree of 'participation' from the local people whom the scheme affects. This is to provide them with a meaningful and proactive role and to reduce the potential for exploitation which is so temptingly likely amid conflicting interests and power imbalances. In practice it seems that the locals are often given the task of observing data via carrying out experiments, guided by the development personnel. The main argument for involving the people in the process is explained by Anon. (ref 2), "The assumption is that the people of the village have deep intuitive knowledge and understanding of their environment and resources, which has been accumulated over generations and that this is usually completely overlooked or underestimated”.
"No method is right for all occasions; the choice of a method depends on the purpose, resources, and available techniques. Even so, a single technique may fail to provide all the answers on a given project".
The vast majority of methods employed by PRA are people based and collective, which can give rise to the strength of networking. By speaking in an open forum opinions can be shared and criticisms can be voiced and hopefully aired with a greater sense of understanding. Moreover, by involving a large group of people the results are more likely to be representative. The large demands on the practitioner imply a need for substantial training and experience to ensure that the most appropriate methods are chosen and used effectively. Recognising local circumstances as a vital part of the analysis is also vital, especially the cultural context and history of the local area. PRA's could fail if the key differences in circumstances are ignored or underestimated.
Despite the weaknesses described above the PRA system offers the potential for cooperative dialogue and a synergism between the conversations of similarly positioned individuals from differing cultures. Its structure can foster the full utilisation of the crucial yet often overlooked expertise held by local people. The technique caters for unbiased data collection and employs a range of methods to increase confidence in the data and therefore in the proposed development plans. When facilitated correctly its success should not be measured purely in terms of money, product or service alone but also in terms of people's health, welfare and in the context of this essay the changes to the development process itself.
The short mock PRA described in the abstract serves as an experience of the technique in action. The appraisal was limited mainly to face to face interviews during which some diagrams and maps were drawn.
The interviews themselves followed the favoured PRA technique in that they had no rigid structure. The records made from those interviews were poor because they were often unstructured, messy and sometimes incomprehensible. They are shown in appendix A. No attempt was made to collate the information recorded logically leaving the information fragmented and dislocated. This rendered much of the interview discussion worthless.
When the pretend NGO representatives made suggestions for particular developments they were met with firm, almost fierce, objections from the village representatives who felt that the proposal did not offer the best solution or, as some said, any improvement. These objections were not from a few isolated villagers but were supported by much of the village cohort. This in itself does not refute the effectiveness of PRA since effectiveness should be measured by the level of success of the implemented proposals rather than their popularity amongst villagers prior to their instigation. However, it seems unlikely that very unpopular proposals would be more successful than popular ones.
The PRA technique encompasses almost every possible method for determining the best course of action for any given development scheme. It also demands that trends should be checked and checked again. It attempts to give some power to the local people in the decision making process in the hope that this will encourage a more enthusiastic, thoughtful and effective participation from them. These strengths give it the potential to be a very powerful tool. However, given the complexity and range of its constituents and the importance of their correct application it is also very difficult to use. Nor is the technique immune to the effects of the attitudes of those who use it. The opposite is more realistic; a PRA is a volatile procedure highly sensitive to style of its facilitator.