Figures have shown that the amount of time children spend watching television has increased (Hamilton, 1998; Brown and Cantor, 2000; Bushman and Anderson, 2001). Children are considered inhabitants of a world inundated by mass media (Brown and Witherspoon, 2002). A controversial issue is when the content of the viewed material contains violence and aggression. The frequency of this content in television programmes and in films was quantified concisely by Browne and Hamilton-Giachritsis (2005). Results from the UNESCO Global Television Violence study show that 61% of programmes investigated contained violence, 55% of which portrayed violence in a realistic setting. They also report that in 71% of these instances, characters showed no remorse for their actions and received no criticism for them. 42% of aggressive acts reported were associated with humour. Over 1000 violent murders, rapes and assaults are shown on television each year (Brown and Witherspoon, 2002).
The influence of the media on the cognitions and behaviour of the child has become a much debated topic over recent years. This can be attributed to a number of reasons. In recent times, media technologies have advanced significantly, making television and films more accessible to children. This has given rise to fears that the child is spending too much time with these media and not enough with real-life friends, relationships or experiences (McQuail, 2000). It is thought that this trend leads to a false perception of reality, from which children can indiscriminately learn and imitate (Huesman, Moise-Titus, Podolski and Aron, 2003). Thorndike (1911) formulated the law of exercise and effects, which claims that behaviours repeated more often are learned and become strong, through the associated exercise, thus leaving the child more susceptible to imitate aggression seen on television (Hamilton, 1998). It is also suggested that children view television passively, and to a certain extent absorb its contents, rather than viewing it critically (Lang, 2000; Jenkins, 1999). Bandura's (1973) social learning theory implies that children model themselves on what they observe: aggression is seen as a viable means of self expression, leading to conspicuous antisocial behaviour (Bushman, 1995).
The exposure of vulnerable and inexperienced young audiences to aggression has been cause for concern (Brown and Cantor, 2000). This, coupled with the theories mentioned, suggests that it is necessary to examine the relationship between viewed aggression and aggression in action and cognition. Research on violence in the media and its effects has been ongoing in the United States and England since the mid-1950's (Murray, 1998, p.415). Since then, a plethora of research has attempted to link television violence with aggression in real life, with children being a focal point of study (Coyne, Archer and Eslea, 2004; Hogan, 2000; Kiewitz and Weaver, 2001). This view has also been opposed - some researchers dispute any real life consequences of viewing aggression (Hamilton, 1998; Browne and Hamilton-Giachritsis, 2005; Bushman and Geen, 1990). Methodological concerns about this research have also been raised (Savage, 2004). These contrasting findings illustrate the contention surrounding this area but also suggest a possible basis for concern. This essay will take the form of delineating and examining research which does and does not link violence on television and films to the cognitions and behaviour of children, in order to determine whether concern over this issue is justified.
The primary concern, in line with the works of Thorndike (1911) and Bandura (1973) is that viewed aggression leads to an increase in aggressive behaviour in children. Evidence shows links with both aggressive cognitions and actual behaviour. Huesmann and Eron's (1986) Prospective Study found children aged six to nine who watched a disproportionately large amount of aggressive material, including television programmes, films and cartoons, to grown into adults who experienced more interpersonal conflict and who believed there were more aggressive solutions to social problems. This study has been repeated in other countries with similar results (Hogan, 2000; Anderson and Bushman, 2001). It provides evidence of a causal relationship between viewed aggression and aggressive cognitions. Rice, Barbour and Prior-Palmieri (1998), conducted a study on the effects of exposure to television on school aged children. They found that children who watched a lot of television had attitude scores that were much higher than the national average. Such attitudes include believing that aggression is normal, and that it should be part of human life. However, some of the children's behaviour vis-à-vis aggression was not observed. Other studies have found that the effect sizes of aggressive cognitions were actually lower than expected, particularly when focusing on unstructured observaways (Drabman and Thomas, 1994). This implies that cognitions alone are not a reliable indicator of aggressive behaviour. Rather, the affective response to aggression and aggression in socially structured settings such as school or the home, are of far more importance (Coyne, Archer and Eslea, 2004; Jenkins, 1999). This implies that cognitions can not be taken too seriously when trying to measure how viewed aggression will manifest itself in behaviour.
A secondary concern is that viewed aggression will cause violent behaviour, in line with the work of Bandura (1973). Research has tended to focus on the general effects of viewed aggression on real life aggression (Wood, Wong and Chancere, 1991), establishing general links between media violence and increased aggression in the child's unconstrained social behaviour. However, other research uncovers the influence of individual differences such as gender, socio-economic status and personality traits on how young children perceive aggression on television and in the media, and how they subsequently act. This research helps to dispel the vague claim that all children's lives are always influenced by televised aggression - this is not always the case (Carruthers and Taggart, 1973; Drabman and Thomas, 1994; Jenkins, 1999). It examines what can specifically make viewed aggression demonstrate itself in behaviour. For example, research has been conducted on the relationship between trait aggression and viewing aggression on television and in films. Bushman and Geen (1990), studied 50 children aged seven to fifteen years-old. They were given personality questionnaires, and viewed a series of violent film excerpts on which they were asked to comment. Children rated high on measures of irritability, proneness to verbal hostility, and in screening or blocking out aggressive stimuli made more violent comments than children who were rated low on these items. In addition, children consequently behaved in a more aggressive manner. This demonstrates that whether or not violent images produce violent tendencies can be contingent on the traits of the individual child.
Other research examines the role of gender in this debate. Though much evidence shows no significant differences between male and female responses to viewed aggression (Huesman, Moise-Titus, Podolski and Aron, 2003; Wood, Wong and Chancere, 1991) there have been some important studies exploring female response. Hoggan (2000) looked at whether the perceived harmlessness of violence was determined by gender, and concluded that while male violence could be seen as less harmless when compared to female aggression, boys and girls of a similar age experience the consequences of seen violence in the same manner. Coyne, Archer and Eslea (2004) went further and studied the effects of viewing aggressive films separately on male and female primary school children. Their results indicated that male children were more susceptible to the effects of viewed aggression, from both media and film, a point reinforced by Anderson and Bushman (2002). While these results imply that more attention should be given to male viewing habits, they also demonstrate the complex role of gender on the matter. This research, in line with other work, challenges the reductionistic stance of social learning theory in terms of the effects of viewed aggression on behaviour, and serves to remind us of the possible influence of biological differences on this controversial matter.
Such evidence does suggest that concern should be shown about the relationship between viewed aggression and aggressive behaviour. While it illustrates the short term effects of children viewing aggression, other studies have implied that negative consequences in the long-term are more a cause for concern. There have been two influential studies investigating these consequences. Johnson, Cohen, Smatles, Kasen and Brook (2002), found a significant association between viewing aggression in adolescence and the likelihood of aggressive behaviour in later life, including robbery, threatening aggression and antisocial behaviour in general. In the second study, Huesman, Moise-Titus, Podolski and Aron (2003), longitudinally examined the viewing patterns of children aged six to nine, and found that fifteen years later, exposure to violence and aggression on television in youth leads to such behaviour in later life. This evidence implies that aggressive imagery on television can have more serious ramifications for the future. Aggressive behaviour can lead to delinquency at a time of life when employment, familial responsibility and chastisement by law are salient concerns. This evidence puts the effects of viewed aggression into context in the larger sense, showing its potential to affect the child in later life. Moreover, it provides an experimental basis for Bandura's social learning theory.
Evidence exists which negates the need for concern over aggression shown on films and television. Savage (2004) highlighted the problems that arise when one is too quick to blame the media for aggressive behaviour in children. While she admits that research has shown links between violence on television and violence in real life, she believes many of these links to be correlations rather than causal effects. Savage argues that children with aggressive tendencies prefer violent programmes, and states that effects of television are hard to measure. They can occur in subtler ways in later life, which may be difficult to observe in overt behaviour. Finally, she states that the role of the child's parents, peers and school life as well as biological factors are more likely to be the overriding factors that contribute towards displayed aggression. Savage places the effects of media low on the list. Jenkins (1999), supports this, and states that real life will always have a more profound effect on behaviour than television will. Hodge and Tripp (1986) believe that television can not be solely blamed for aggressive behaviours in children, and that it is imperative to consider socio-economic status and situational factors, challenging the somewhat reductionist social learning approach. They reason that children perceive television as a mode of entertainment, not as a source of information about the world. They argue further that what a child views is not infallible - it has the ability to be corrected and put into context by others, namely through socialisation with parents and peers. Hamilton (1998), supports this view, stating that television only exacerbates other more influential factors, rather than having its own direct effect.
The evidence dovetails nicely, showing that caution should be taken rather than concern being expressed. The implications of viewed aggression on both the immediate and long term behaviour of children, and the possibility of children imitating behaviours seen on television in line with Bandura's social learning theory, are apparent. While the majority of studies cited isolate a core link between viewed aggression and aggression in action or cognitions, research does also exist that denies this link - research highlighting the folly of blame reductionism and the greater influence of factors other than the media on behaviour. Conclusively, the relationship between viewed aggression and aggression in action and cognitions is a controversial one, often made more uncertain by public opinion. This essay has attempted to delineate research which links television violence to displayed aggression and antisocial behaviour in children and that which suggests it has little effect by means of the above findings.
Savage implies the difficulties with conducting this research. Most evidence is collected using qualitative methods, which comes with its own set of caveats. Obtaining evidence by means of a questionnaire, in the manner of Bushman and Geen (1990) for example, is not always the most accurate way to obtain results. Also, the subject of the research focuses on testing children, who may not always treat scientific experiments with the appropriate respect and seriousness. The question of indirect aggression, whether in the form of verbal insults or more subtle antisocial behaviour, has also been studied. This type of behaviour can have just as much of an impact on behaviour as overt aggression (Coyne, Archer and Eslea, 2004), but can be harder to observe in behaviour. This can confuse the research, leading to an inaccurate picture of events. The question of indirect aggression can seem to be the beginning of a slippery slope argument, as one may wonder how far the criticisms of television content will expand in the future. It is also worth noting that much media is allocated an age suitability rating, showing the role taken by the industry to reduce the affects of aggressive imagery on young children in particular.
The answer seems to be that awareness rather than concern is appropriate. Research does not suggest a clear link between viewed and displayed violence and aggression, therefore there is no need to be particularly worried at present. It does, however, highlight what to be aware of when embarking on this debate. Firstly, suitable parental control and the discouragement of violence can combat the imitation of aggression by children displayed on television and in films, in line with the theories of Bandura (1973) and Thorndike (1911). Such theories should serve as warnings for the possible consequences of violence on television. Secondly, research demonstrates that aggressive images in the media and on television in particular can not be attributed to one cause - socio-economic, biological and familial influences must be considered first and foremost, not to mention proposed sex differences. Lastly, public opinion and inconclusive research can tend to distort the issue, and not give due attention to the influences of real life on the behaviour of children (Bushman and Anderson, 2001). Public health reports suggest multidisciplinary approaches to research, incorporating neuroscience, sociology, child development and economics (Brown and Cantor, 2002), can establish a clearer state of events.
Research suggests that exercising caution over the viewing habits of children without exaggeration is prudent. An extensive incorporation of the media and its effects into the school curriculum has also been proposed (Potter, 2003; Hogan, 2000). It is only through the means suggested that the relationship between viewed aggression and antisocial behaviour and cognitions can be better understood.