The pantograph will have a wire traversing down the side of middle of one of it's supporting members. The power could have been sent through the frame itself, however this creates problems with insulating the up/down mechanism on the pantograph and the tram body. Here I have looked at whether to use AC or DC through the pantograph and advantages and disadvantages for each. I have also looked at the conductor used in the pantograph and how that's going to be insulated. In looking at the conductor I have seen how the resistivity of the wire affects the cross-sectional area of wire required and it's shape. Lastly, I have looked at how to join the wiring on the pantograph to limit corrosion and benefit maintenance.
To work out the resistance of any conductor travelling down the pantograph, I will use the equation
where R is the overall resistance of the conductor,
where  R = resistivity of material (Ohm-m) l = length of conductor (m) A = cross-sectional area of conductor (m2) First, I need to establish the voltage and current that will be travelling through the pantograph. I will choose a high voltage and limit current to reduce losses. The Health and Safety Executive, states in their publication GS9: 'Fixed installations having a single point-to-pointvoltage up to 750V AC or 1500V DC and any LV DC system with voltages up to 1000V will then require only the normal requirements for access, egress and double insulation of all exposed live parts of the electrical equipment and internal wiring'.7 750 V AC stipulated as the maximum voltage as this point, but DC is acceptable up to 1000V, so I will go for 800V. Because of this high Voltage, the current through the wire will also be quite high. An equation can be used to estimate this. Because the voltage is quite high, even at 800V, we want the losses to be as low as possible. This means considering resistivity of the material chosen.
In the search for a good low-cost conductor, one could easily choose copper and be done with it. After all, copper is one of the cheapest metals to form because it is so malleable and, for it's electrical characteristics, is of excellent value for money. Copper has many alloys associated with it, the uses of which are shown below.
Say I was looking to reduce the conductor gauge of a wire by one step, I could reduce the wire size down proportionally, as shown in the chart above.
Aluminium – 92%Cu – 118%Brass – 95%Bronze – 95%Silver – 105%Gold – 118%Steel alloy – 96%
When choosing the proper material for the pantograph, one must first work out the current it will have to draw. DC is the most common form of current in electrical motors, so that is what will used here. The current will depend on the weight of the train, number of passengers, speed of the train and acceleration of the motor, all of which will be estimated. To work out the current, we can use the formula
Lets look therefore at a typical example. A tram may weigh 30 tonnes, that's 30 000kg, and carry 150 passengers with an average weight of 80kg (12 tonnes in total). The tram could have an average speed of 50km/h, or 14m/s. Acceleration will be no more than 1.4m/s Therefore
Using P = V.I , we can obtain a current value for a tolerance 748.5V voltage as being 1100A, which sounds about right for a tram of this sort. To completely traverse the frame of the pantograph,, we will need not more than 3m of cable. Because we want to keep losses to a minimum, we want no more than 0.2% voltage drop and to keep the motor within tolerances. Using R = V/I , this equated to a resistance of 0.013 To test this I have used a simple circuit with a potential divider to calculate V
With R (total) and therefore required cross-sectional area, A, being calculated as
with This gives a cross-sectional area requirement of 3.7cm This cross-sectional area of wire will have to be split up into several stands to make sure that minimum tension and compression is being applied to the outside and inside of the wire, which would be significant if using solid core wire. If the wire is constantly being bent, i.e. tensioned and compressed too much, then the metal will harden and snap. This is another reason for using copper, as it's ductility will delay this happening. Another alternative to the arrangement of strands other than a circular cross-section would be a flat wire. This will reduce stress in the wire more still, prolonging the life of the wire for maintenance purposes.
The cable must be insulated from the metal of the frame at both ends. This will protect any stray currents or induce any currents from nearby cables into the wire. These insulation sleeves can be made from an insulating material such as rubber or Teflon. In wet areas, it is important to use a material like Teflon as it has a resistance to water, which rubber does not.
Looking at the two main choices, aluminium and copper, both create a stable oxide on their surface once exposed to the elements. The oxides are stable at constant temperature. However, copper oxides grow if the copper is heated. If the copper is heated for a lengthy amount of time, then eventually the metal will harden and break. This is why it is especially important to make sure the copper has a good connection, therefore higher tolerances in the joining processes need to be observed.
To join the wires together, several methods are available. These include crimp and wire wrap, as well as fusion joining. Crimp joints consume a lot of wires and power and are difficult to maintain. You also need specialist tools to make connections in this way, which are costly and could be time-consuming. As a result these methods should be avoided. Wire wraps also consume many wires but are better for the environment and less bulky. They are also very difficult to make, and to make a good connection you need to make sure each wrap is tight. For these reasons, we should move away from wire wraps.
From this table, alloys with good forming and good corrosion properties can be selected to form connectors in the pantograph. A combination of two or three alloys can be used, although the more alloys, the more the cost will increase. Some charts have even shown aluminium-copper alloys to be better than pure copper.
Alternatively, pressure connections can also be used. These types of connections are secure and desirable because there are fewer points where the current can escape, making it more efficient. The two main types of pressure connections are crimp and clamp, which can be expanded on in more detail below. Crimp connectors are the most commonly used pressure connection and is what many people will think of when they hear the word ‘crimp'. This involves the metal conductor being forced into a Z-shaped crimp which is fitted onto the live conductor and then fastened by a crimping tool. The Z-shaped crimp should 'grab' the metal conductor, making sure it cannot be pulled back out. They are, however, liable to corrosion and must be sealed or insulated after to ensure a good connection. Clamp connectors are used when connecting large multiplicities of conductors together. They consist of two half circles, one of which has a slight angular V-shaped cut into the end. This is then placed onto the live conductors and fastened together with either screws or crimping. The thing to note about clamp connectors is that they are secure against ‘pulling’ forces, but they have less insulation against electrical breakdown in the presence of other metals, so they must be sealed or specially insulated.
Conclusion
I have decided the pantograph should run a relatively high voltage of 750v, which is at the top of the scale of the HSE's guidelines without requiring further insulation. I've decided higher voltage is better because of the reduced losses. The current drawn will be DC, because the motor will be easier to control that way with fewer losses that resistors in an AC motor. Also DC doesn't produce inductance in the wire, though this may not be such an issue in this application, even with AC. Insulation will be limited to silicon rubber strips because of the small gaps required between live wire and earthed frame. The material is both safe and durable and will withstand bad weather. I have chosen copper as the main conductor because it is cheap at the moment and have good conductivity and ductility. Aluminium may be considered at a later stage if the price of copper goes up. Multithread, flat copper wire would be best to stop breakages and give extra flexibility. Clamp connectors will be used to join wires together, but conductive paste may have to be used to keep contacts clean when operating.